King Lear

ACT 1

Scene 1
Enter Kent, Gloucester, and Edmund.
 
KENT  I thought the King had more affected the Duke
of Albany than Cornwall.
GLOUCESTER  It did always seem so to us, but now in
the division of the kingdom, it appears not which
of the dukes he values most, for equalities are so
weighed that curiosity in neither can make choice
of either’s moiety.
KENT  Is not this your son, my lord?
GLOUCESTER  His breeding, sir, hath been at my
charge. I have so often blushed to acknowledge
him that now I am brazed to ’t.
KENT  I cannot conceive you.
GLOUCESTER  Sir, this young fellow’s mother could,
whereupon she grew round-wombed and had indeed,
sir, a son for her cradle ere she had a husband
for her bed. Do you smell a fault?
KENT  I cannot wish the fault undone, the issue of it
being so proper.
GLOUCESTER  But I have a son, sir, by order of law,
some year elder than this, who yet is no dearer in
my account. Though this knave came something
saucily to the world before he was sent for, yet was
his mother fair, there was good sport at his making,
and the whoreson must be acknowledged.—Do you
know this noble gentleman, Edmund?
EDMUND  No, my lord.
GLOUCESTER  My lord of Kent. Remember him hereafter
as my honorable friend.
EDMUND  My services to your Lordship.
KENT  I must love you and sue to know you better.
EDMUND  Sir, I shall study deserving.
GLOUCESTER  He hath been out nine years, and away he
shall again. (Sennet.) The King is coming.
 
Enter King Lear, Cornwall, Albany, Goneril, Regan,
Cordelia, and Attendants.
 
LEAR
Attend the lords of France and Burgundy,
Gloucester.
GLOUCESTER  I shall, my lord.                                            	
He exits.
LEAR
Meantime we shall express our darker purpose.—
Give me the map there.                                     	
He is handed a map.
Know that we have divided
In three our kingdom, and ’tis our fast intent
To shake all cares and business from our age,
Conferring them on younger strengths, while we
Unburdened crawl toward death. Our son of
Cornwall
And you, our no less loving son of Albany,
We have this hour a constant will to publish
Our daughters’ several dowers, that future strife
May be prevented now.
The two great princes, France and Burgundy,
Great rivals in our youngest daughter’s love,
Long in our court have made their amorous sojourn
And here are to be answered. Tell me, my
daughters—
Since now we will divest us both of rule,
Interest of territory, cares of state—
Which of you shall we say doth love us most,
That we our largest bounty may extend
Where nature doth with merit challenge. Goneril,
Our eldest born, speak first.
GONERIL
Sir, I love you more than word can wield the
matter,
Dearer than eyesight, space, and liberty,
Beyond what can be valued, rich or rare,
No less than life, with grace, health, beauty, honor;
As much as child e’er loved, or father found;
A love that makes breath poor, and speech unable.
Beyond all manner of so much I love you.
CORDELIA, aside
What shall Cordelia speak? Love, and be silent.
LEAR, pointing to the map
Of all these bounds, even from this line to this,
With shadowy forests and with champains riched,
With plenteous rivers and wide-skirted meads,
We make thee lady. To thine and Albany’s issue
Be this perpetual.—What says our second
daughter,
Our dearest Regan, wife of Cornwall? Speak.
REGAN
I am made of that self mettle as my sister
And prize me at her worth. In my true heart
I find she names my very deed of love;
Only she comes too short, that I profess
Myself an enemy to all other joys
Which the most precious square of sense
possesses,
And find I am alone felicitate
In your dear Highness’ love.
CORDELIA, aside  Then poor Cordelia!
And yet not so, since I am sure my love’s
More ponderous than my tongue.
LEAR
To thee and thine hereditary ever
Remain this ample third of our fair kingdom,
No less in space, validity, and pleasure
Than that conferred on Goneril.—Now, our joy,
Although our last and least, to whose young love
The vines of France and milk of Burgundy
Strive to be interessed, what can you say to draw
A third more opulent than your sisters’? Speak.
CORDELIA  Nothing, my lord.
LEAR  Nothing?
CORDELIA  Nothing.
LEAR
Nothing will come of nothing. Speak again.
CORDELIA
Unhappy that I am, I cannot heave
My heart into my mouth. I love your Majesty
According to my bond, no more nor less.
LEAR
How, how, Cordelia? Mend your speech a little,
Lest you may mar your fortunes.
CORDELIA  Good my lord,
You have begot me, bred me, loved me.
I return those duties back as are right fit:
Obey you, love you, and most honor you.
Why have my sisters husbands if they say
They love you all? Haply, when I shall wed,
That lord whose hand must take my plight shall
carry
Half my love with him, half my care and duty.
Sure I shall never marry like my sisters,
To love my father all.
LEAR  But goes thy heart with this?
CORDELIA  Ay, my good lord.
LEAR  So young and so untender?
CORDELIA  So young, my lord, and true.
LEAR
Let it be so. Thy truth, then, be thy dower,
For by the sacred radiance of the sun,
The mysteries of Hecate and the night,
By all the operation of the orbs
From whom we do exist and cease to be,
Here I disclaim all my paternal care,
Propinquity, and property of blood,
And as a stranger to my heart and me
Hold thee from this forever. The barbarous
Scythian,
Or he that makes his generation messes
To gorge his appetite, shall to my bosom
Be as well neighbored, pitied, and relieved
As thou my sometime daughter.
KENT  Good my liege—
LEAR  Peace, Kent.
Come not between the dragon and his wrath.
I loved her most and thought to set my rest
On her kind nursery. To Cordelia. Hence and avoid
my sight!—
So be my grave my peace as here I give
Her father’s heart from her.—Call France. Who stirs?
Call Burgundy. An Attendant exits. Cornwall and
Albany,
With my two daughters’ dowers digest the third.
Let pride, which she calls plainness, marry her.
I do invest you jointly with my power,
Preeminence, and all the large effects
That troop with majesty. Ourself by monthly course,
With reservation of an hundred knights
By you to be sustained, shall our abode
Make with you by due turn. Only we shall retain
The name and all th’ addition to a king.
The sway, revenue, execution of the rest,
Belovèd sons, be yours, which to confirm,
This coronet part between you.
KENT  Royal Lear,
Whom I have ever honored as my king,
Loved as my father, as my master followed,
As my great patron thought on in my prayers—
LEAR
The bow is bent and drawn. Make from the shaft.
KENT
Let it fall rather, though the fork invade
The region of my heart. Be Kent unmannerly
When Lear is mad. What wouldst thou do, old man?
Think’st thou that duty shall have dread to speak
When power to flattery bows? To plainness honor’s
bound
When majesty falls to folly. Reserve thy state,
And in thy best consideration check
This hideous rashness. Answer my life my
judgment,
Thy youngest daughter does not love thee least,
Nor are those empty-hearted whose low sounds
Reverb no hollowness.
LEAR  Kent, on thy life, no more.
KENT
My life I never held but as a pawn
To wage against thine enemies, nor fear to lose
it,
Thy safety being motive.
LEAR  Out of my sight!
KENT
See better, Lear, and let me still remain
The true blank of thine eye.
LEAR  Now, by Apollo—
KENT  Now, by Apollo, king,
Thou swear’st thy gods in vain.
LEAR  O vassal! Miscreant!
ALBANY/CORNWALL  Dear sir, forbear.
KENT
Kill thy physician, and thy fee bestow
Upon the foul disease. Revoke thy gift,
Or whilst I can vent clamor from my throat,
I’ll tell thee thou dost evil.
LEAR
Hear me, recreant; on thine allegiance, hear me!
That thou hast sought to make us break our vows—
Which we durst never yet—and with strained pride
To come betwixt our sentence and our power,
Which nor our nature nor our place can bear,
Our potency made good, take thy reward:
Five days we do allot thee for provision
To shield thee from disasters of the world,
And on the sixth to turn thy hated back
Upon our kingdom. If on the tenth day following
Thy banished trunk be found in our dominions,
The moment is thy death. Away! By Jupiter,
This shall not be revoked.
KENT
Fare thee well, king. Sith thus thou wilt appear,
Freedom lives hence, and banishment is here.
To Cordelia. The gods to their dear shelter take
thee, maid,
That justly think’st and hast most rightly said.
To Goneril and Regan. And your large speeches
may your deeds approve,
That good effects may spring from words of love.—
Thus Kent, O princes, bids you all adieu.
He’ll shape his old course in a country new.
He exits.
 
Flourish. Enter Gloucester with France, and Burgundy,
and Attendants.
 
GLOUCESTER
Here’s France and Burgundy, my noble lord.
LEAR  My lord of Burgundy,
We first address toward you, who with this king
Hath rivaled for our daughter. What in the least
Will you require in present dower with her,
Or cease your quest of love?
BURGUNDY  Most royal Majesty,
I crave no more than hath your Highness offered,
Nor will you tender less.
LEAR  Right noble Burgundy,
When she was dear to us, we did hold her so,
But now her price is fallen. Sir, there she stands.
If aught within that little seeming substance,
Or all of it, with our displeasure pieced
And nothing more, may fitly like your Grace,
She’s there, and she is yours.
BURGUNDY  I know no answer.
LEAR
Will you, with those infirmities she owes,
Unfriended, new-adopted to our hate,
Dowered with our curse and strangered with our
oath,
Take her or leave her?
BURGUNDY  Pardon me, royal sir,
Election makes not up in such conditions.
LEAR
Then leave her, sir, for by the power that made me
I tell you all her wealth.—For you, great king,
I would not from your love make such a stray
To match you where I hate. Therefore beseech you
T’ avert your liking a more worthier way
Than on a wretch whom Nature is ashamed
Almost t’ acknowledge hers.
FRANCE  This is most strange,
That she whom even but now was your best
object,
The argument of your praise, balm of your age,
The best, the dearest, should in this trice of time
Commit a thing so monstrous to dismantle
So many folds of favor. Sure her offense
Must be of such unnatural degree
That monsters it, or your forevouched affection
Fall into taint; which to believe of her
Must be a faith that reason without miracle
Should never plant in me.
CORDELIA, to Lear  I yet beseech your Majesty—
If for I want that glib and oily art
To speak and purpose not, since what I well
intend
I’ll do ’t before I speak—that you make known
It is no vicious blot, murder, or foulness,
No unchaste action or dishonored step
That hath deprived me of your grace and favor,
But even for want of that for which I am richer:
A still-soliciting eye and such a tongue
That I am glad I have not, though not to have it
Hath lost me in your liking.
LEAR  Better thou
Hadst not been born than not t’ have pleased me
better.
FRANCE
Is it but this—a tardiness in nature
Which often leaves the history unspoke
That it intends to do?—My lord of Burgundy,
What say you to the lady? Love’s not love
When it is mingled with regards that stands
Aloof from th’ entire point. Will you have her?
She is herself a dowry.
BURGUNDY, to Lear  Royal king,
Give but that portion which yourself proposed,
And here I take Cordelia by the hand,
Duchess of Burgundy.
LEAR
Nothing. I have sworn. I am firm.
BURGUNDY, to Cordelia
I am sorry, then, you have so lost a father
That you must lose a husband.
CORDELIA  Peace be with
Burgundy.
Since that respect and fortunes are his love,
I shall not be his wife.
FRANCE
Fairest Cordelia, that art most rich being poor;
Most choice, forsaken; and most loved, despised,
Thee and thy virtues here I seize upon,
Be it lawful I take up what’s cast away.
Gods, gods! ’Tis strange that from their cold’st
neglect
My love should kindle to enflamed respect.—
Thy dowerless daughter, king, thrown to my
chance,
Is queen of us, of ours, and our fair France.
Not all the dukes of wat’rish Burgundy
Can buy this unprized precious maid of me.—
Bid them farewell, Cordelia, though unkind.
Thou losest here a better where to find.
LEAR
Thou hast her, France. Let her be thine, for we
Have no such daughter, nor shall ever see
That face of hers again. To Cordelia. Therefore
begone
Without our grace, our love, our benison.—
Come, noble Burgundy.
Flourish. All but France, Cordelia,
Goneril, and Regan exit.
FRANCE  Bid farewell to your sisters.
CORDELIA
The jewels of our father, with washed eyes
Cordelia leaves you. I know you what you are,
And like a sister am most loath to call
Your faults as they are named. Love well our
father.
To your professèd bosoms I commit him;
But yet, alas, stood I within his grace,
I would prefer him to a better place.
So farewell to you both.
REGAN
Prescribe not us our duty.
GONERIL  Let your study
Be to content your lord, who hath received you
At Fortune’s alms. You have obedience scanted
And well are worth the want that you have wanted.
CORDELIA
Time shall unfold what plighted cunning hides,
Who covers faults at last with shame derides.
Well may you prosper.
FRANCE  Come, my fair Cordelia.
France and Cordelia exit.
GONERIL  Sister, it is not little I have to say of what
most nearly appertains to us both. I think our
father will hence tonight.
REGAN  That’s most certain, and with you; next month
with us.
GONERIL  You see how full of changes his age is; the
observation we have made of it hath not been
little. He always loved our sister most, and with
what poor judgment he hath now cast her off
appears too grossly.
REGAN  ’Tis the infirmity of his age. Yet he hath ever
but slenderly known himself.
GONERIL  The best and soundest of his time hath been
but rash. Then must we look from his age to
receive not alone the imperfections of long-engraffed
condition, but therewithal the unruly waywardness
that infirm and choleric years bring with
them.
REGAN  Such unconstant starts are we like to have
from him as this of Kent’s banishment.
GONERIL  There is further compliment of leave-taking
between France and him. Pray you, let us sit
together. If our father carry authority with such
disposition as he bears, this last surrender of his will
but offend us.
REGAN  We shall further think of it.
GONERIL  We must do something, and i’ th’ heat.
They exit.
 
Scene 2
Enter Edmund, the Bastard.
 
EDMUND
Thou, Nature, art my goddess. To thy law
My services are bound. Wherefore should I
Stand in the plague of custom, and permit
The curiosity of nations to deprive me
For that I am some twelve or fourteen moonshines
Lag of a brother? why “bastard”? Wherefore “base,”
When my dimensions are as well compact,
My mind as generous and my shape as true
As honest madam’s issue? Why brand they us
With “base,” with “baseness,” “bastardy,” “base,”
“base,”
Who, in the lusty stealth of nature, take
More composition and fierce quality
Than doth within a dull, stale, tired bed
Go to th’ creating a whole tribe of fops
Got ’tween asleep and wake? Well then,
Legitimate Edgar, I must have your land.
Our father’s love is to the bastard Edmund
As to th’ legitimate. Fine word, “legitimate.”
Well, my legitimate, if this letter speed
And my invention thrive, Edmund the base
Shall top th’ legitimate. I grow, I prosper.
Now, gods, stand up for bastards!
 
Enter Gloucester.
 
GLOUCESTER
Kent banished thus? And France in choler parted?
And the King gone tonight, prescribed his power,
Confined to exhibition? All this done
Upon the gad?—Edmund, how now? What news?
EDMUND  So please your Lordship, none. He puts a
paper in his pocket.
GLOUCESTER  Why so earnestly seek you to put up that
letter?
EDMUND  I know no news, my lord.
GLOUCESTER  What paper were you reading?
EDMUND  Nothing, my lord.
GLOUCESTER  No? What needed then that terrible dispatch
of it into your pocket? The quality of nothing
hath not such need to hide itself. Let’s see. Come, if
it be nothing, I shall not need spectacles.
EDMUND  I beseech you, sir, pardon me. It is a letter
from my brother that I have not all o’erread; and
for so much as I have perused, I find it not fit for
your o’erlooking.
GLOUCESTER  Give me the letter, sir.
EDMUND  I shall offend either to detain or give it. The
contents, as in part I understand them, are to
blame.
GLOUCESTER  Let’s see, let’s see.
Edmund gives him the paper.
EDMUND  I hope, for my brother’s justification, he
wrote this but as an essay or taste of my virtue.
GLOUCESTER (reads)  This policy and reverence of age
makes the world bitter to the best of our times, keeps
our fortunes from us till our oldness cannot relish
them. I begin to find an idle and fond bondage in the
oppression of aged tyranny, who sways not as it hath
power but as it is suffered. Come to me, that of this I
may speak more. If our father would sleep till I waked
him, you should enjoy half his revenue forever and
live the beloved of your brother.                                          	Edgar.
Hum? Conspiracy? “Sleep till I wake him, you
should enjoy half his revenue.” My son Edgar! Had
he a hand to write this? A heart and brain to breed it
in?—When came you to this? Who brought it?
EDMUND  It was not brought me, my lord; there’s the
cunning of it. I found it thrown in at the casement
of my closet.
GLOUCESTER  You know the character to be your
brother’s?
EDMUND  If the matter were good, my lord, I durst
swear it were his; but in respect of that, I would
fain think it were not.
GLOUCESTER  It is his.
EDMUND  It is his hand, my lord, but I hope his heart is
not in the contents.
GLOUCESTER  Has he never before sounded you in this
business?
EDMUND  Never, my lord. But I have heard him oft
maintain it to be fit that, sons at perfect age and
fathers declined, the father should be as ward to the
son, and the son manage his revenue.
GLOUCESTER  O villain, villain! His very opinion in the
letter. Abhorred villain! Unnatural, detested, brutish
villain! Worse than brutish!—Go, sirrah, seek
him. I’ll apprehend him.—Abominable villain!—
Where is he?
EDMUND  I do not well know, my lord. If it shall please
you to suspend your indignation against my brother
till you can derive from him better testimony of his
intent, you should run a certain course; where, if
you violently proceed against him, mistaking his
purpose, it would make a great gap in your own
honor and shake in pieces the heart of his obedience.
I dare pawn down my life for him that he hath
writ this to feel my affection to your Honor, and to
no other pretense of danger.
GLOUCESTER  Think you so?
EDMUND  If your Honor judge it meet, I will place you
where you shall hear us confer of this, and by an
auricular assurance have your satisfaction, and that
without any further delay than this very evening.
GLOUCESTER  He cannot be such a monster.
EDMUND  Nor is not, sure.
GLOUCESTER  To his father, that so tenderly and entirely
loves him! Heaven and Earth! Edmund, seek him
out; wind me into him, I pray you. Frame the
business after your own wisdom. I would unstate
myself to be in a due resolution.
EDMUND  I will seek him, sir, presently, convey the
business as I shall find means, and acquaint you
withal.
GLOUCESTER  These late eclipses in the sun and moon
portend no good to us. Though the wisdom of
nature can reason it thus and thus, yet nature finds
itself scourged by the sequent effects. Love cools,
friendship falls off, brothers divide; in cities, mutinies;
in countries, discord; in palaces, treason; and
the bond cracked ’twixt son and father. This villain
of mine comes under the prediction: there’s son
against father. The King falls from bias of nature:
there’s father against child. We have seen the best of
our time. Machinations, hollowness, treachery, and
all ruinous disorders follow us disquietly to our
graves.—Find out this villain, Edmund. It shall
lose thee nothing. Do it carefully.—And the noble
and true-hearted Kent banished! His offense, honesty!
’Tis strange.                                                                        	
He exits.
EDMUND  This is the excellent foppery of the world, that
when we are sick in fortune (often the surfeits of
our own behavior) we make guilty of our disasters
the sun, the moon, and stars, as if we were villains
on necessity; fools by heavenly compulsion; knaves,
thieves, and treachers by spherical predominance;
drunkards, liars, and adulterers by an enforced
obedience of planetary influence; and all that we
are evil in, by a divine thrusting on. An admirable
evasion of whoremaster man, to lay his goatish
disposition on the charge of a star! My father
compounded with my mother under the Dragon’s
tail, and my nativity was under Ursa Major, so that it
follows I am rough and lecherous. Fut, I should
have been that I am, had the maidenliest star in the
firmament twinkled on my bastardizing. Edgar—
 
Enter Edgar.
 
and pat he comes like the catastrophe of the old
comedy. My cue is villainous melancholy, with a
sigh like Tom o’ Bedlam.—O, these eclipses do
portend these divisions. Fa, sol, la, mi.
EDGAR  How now, brother Edmund, what serious contemplation
are you in?
EDMUND  I am thinking, brother, of a prediction I read
this other day, what should follow these eclipses.
EDGAR  Do you busy yourself with that?
EDMUND  I promise you, the effects he writes of succeed
unhappily, as of unnaturalness between the
child and the parent, death, dearth, dissolutions of
ancient amities, divisions in state, menaces and
maledictions against king and nobles, needless diffidences,
banishment of friends, dissipation of cohorts,
nuptial breaches, and I know not what.
EDGAR  How long have you been a sectary
astronomical?
EDMUND  Come, come, when saw you my father last?
EDGAR  The night gone by.
EDMUND  Spake you with him?
EDGAR  Ay, two hours together.
EDMUND  Parted you in good terms? Found you no
displeasure in him by word nor countenance?
EDGAR  None at all.
EDMUND  Bethink yourself wherein you may have offended
him, and at my entreaty forbear his presence
until some little time hath qualified the heat
of his displeasure, which at this instant so rageth in
him that with the mischief of your person it would
scarcely allay.
EDGAR  Some villain hath done me wrong.
EDMUND  That’s my fear. I pray you have a continent
forbearance till the speed of his rage goes slower;
and, as I say, retire with me to my lodging, from
whence I will fitly bring you to hear my lord speak.
Pray you go. There’s my key. If you do stir abroad,
go armed.
EDGAR  Armed, brother?
EDMUND  Brother, I advise you to the best. I am no
honest man if there be any good meaning toward
you. I have told you what I have seen and heard, but
faintly, nothing like the image and horror of it. Pray
you, away.
EDGAR  Shall I hear from you anon?
EDMUND  I do serve you in this business.                      	
Edgar exits.
A credulous father and a brother noble,
Whose nature is so far from doing harms
That he suspects none; on whose foolish honesty
My practices ride easy. I see the business.
Let me, if not by birth, have lands by wit.
All with me’s meet that I can fashion fit.
He exits.
 
Scene 3
Enter Goneril and Oswald, her Steward.
 
GONERIL  Did my father strike my gentleman for chiding
of his Fool?
OSWALD  Ay, madam.
GONERIL
By day and night he wrongs me. Every hour
He flashes into one gross crime or other
That sets us all at odds. I’ll not endure it.
His knights grow riotous, and himself upbraids us
On every trifle. When he returns from hunting,
I will not speak with him. Say I am sick.
If you come slack of former services,
You shall do well. The fault of it I’ll answer.
OSWALD  He’s coming, madam. I hear him.
GONERIL
Put on what weary negligence you please,
You and your fellows. I’d have it come to question.
If he distaste it, let him to my sister,
Whose mind and mine I know in that are one,
Not to be overruled. Idle old man
That still would manage those authorities
That he hath given away. Now, by my life,
Old fools are babes again and must be used
With checks as flatteries, when they are seen
abused.
Remember what I have said.
OSWALD  Well, madam.
GONERIL
And let his knights have colder looks among you.
What grows of it, no matter. Advise your fellows so.
I would breed from hence occasions, and I shall,
That I may speak. I’ll write straight to my sister
To hold my very course. Prepare for dinner.
They exit in different directions.
 
Scene 4
Enter Kent in disguise.
 
KENT
If but as well I other accents borrow
That can my speech diffuse, my good intent
May carry through itself to that full issue
For which I razed my likeness. Now, banished Kent,
If thou canst serve where thou dost stand
condemned,
So may it come thy master, whom thou lov’st,
Shall find thee full of labors.
 
Horns within. Enter Lear, Knights, and Attendants.
 
LEAR  Let me not stay a jot for dinner. Go get it ready.
An Attendant exits.
How now, what art thou?
KENT  A man, sir.
LEAR  What dost thou profess? What wouldst thou with
us?
KENT  I do profess to be no less than I seem, to serve
him truly that will put me in trust, to love him that
is honest, to converse with him that is wise and says
little, to fear judgment, to fight when I cannot
choose, and to eat no fish.
LEAR  What art thou?
KENT  A very honest-hearted fellow, and as poor as the
King.
LEAR  If thou be’st as poor for a subject as he’s for a
king, thou art poor enough. What wouldst thou?
KENT  Service.
LEAR  Who wouldst thou serve?
KENT  You.
LEAR  Dost thou know me, fellow?
KENT  No, sir, but you have that in your countenance
which I would fain call master.
LEAR  What’s that?
KENT  Authority.
LEAR  What services canst do?
KENT  I can keep honest counsel, ride, run, mar a
curious tale in telling it, and deliver a plain message
bluntly. That which ordinary men are fit for I
am qualified in, and the best of me is diligence.
LEAR  How old art thou?
KENT  Not so young, sir, to love a woman for singing,
nor so old to dote on her for anything. I have years
on my back forty-eight.
LEAR  Follow me. Thou shalt serve me—if I like thee
no worse after dinner. I will not part from thee
yet.—Dinner, ho, dinner!—Where’s my knave, my
Fool? Go you and call my Fool hither.
An Attendant exits.
 
Enter Oswald, the Steward.
 
You, you, sirrah, where’s my daughter?
OSWALD  So please you—                                                    	
He exits.
LEAR  What says the fellow there? Call the clotpole
back. A Knight exits. Where’s my Fool? Ho! I think
the world’s asleep.
 
Enter Knight again.
 
How now? Where’s that mongrel?
KNIGHT  He says, my lord, your daughter is not well.
LEAR  Why came not the slave back to me when I
called him?
KNIGHT  Sir, he answered me in the roundest manner,
he would not.
LEAR  He would not?
KNIGHT  My lord, I know not what the matter is, but to
my judgment your Highness is not entertained
with that ceremonious affection as you were wont.
There’s a great abatement of kindness appears as
well in the general dependents as in the Duke
himself also, and your daughter.
LEAR  Ha? Sayst thou so?
KNIGHT  I beseech you pardon me, my lord, if I be
mistaken, for my duty cannot be silent when I think
your Highness wronged.
LEAR  Thou but remembrest me of mine own conception.
I have perceived a most faint neglect of late,
which I have rather blamed as mine own jealous
curiosity than as a very pretense and purpose of
unkindness. I will look further into ’t. But where’s
my Fool? I have not seen him this two days.
KNIGHT  Since my young lady’s going into France, sir,
the Fool hath much pined away.
LEAR  No more of that. I have noted it well.—Go you
and tell my daughter I would speak with her. An
Attendant exits. Go you call hither my Fool.
Another exits.
 
Enter Oswald, the Steward.
 
O you, sir, you, come you hither, sir. Who am I, sir?
OSWALD  My lady’s father.
LEAR  “My lady’s father”? My lord’s knave! You whoreson
dog, you slave, you cur!
OSWALD  I am none of these, my lord, I beseech your
pardon.
LEAR  Do you bandy looks with me, you rascal?
Lear strikes him.
OSWALD  I’ll not be strucken, my lord.
KENT, tripping him  Nor tripped neither, you base
football player?
LEAR  I thank thee, fellow. Thou serv’st me, and I’ll
love thee.
KENT, to Oswald  Come, sir, arise. Away. I’ll teach you
differences. Away, away. If you will measure your
lubber’s length again, tarry. But away. Go to. Have
you wisdom? So.                                                        	Oswald exits.
LEAR  Now, my friendly knave, I thank thee. There’s
earnest of thy service.                                 	He gives Kent a purse.
 
Enter Fool.
 
FOOL  Let me hire him too. To Kent. Here’s my
coxcomb.                                                     	
He offers Kent his cap.
LEAR  How now, my pretty knave, how dost thou?
FOOL, to Kent  Sirrah, you were best take my
coxcomb.
LEAR  Why, my boy?
FOOL  Why? For taking one’s part that’s out of favor.
To Kent. Nay, an thou canst not smile as the
wind sits, thou ’lt catch cold shortly. There, take my
coxcomb. Why, this fellow has banished two on ’s
daughters and did the third a blessing against his
will. If thou follow him, thou must needs wear my
coxcomb.—How now, nuncle? Would I had two
coxcombs and two daughters.
LEAR  Why, my boy?
FOOL  If I gave them all my living, I’d keep my coxcombs
myself. There’s mine. Beg another of thy
daughters.
LEAR  Take heed, sirrah—the whip.
FOOL  Truth’s a dog must to kennel; he must be
whipped out, when the Lady Brach may stand by th’
fire and stink.
LEAR  A pestilent gall to me!
FOOL  Sirrah, I’ll teach thee a speech.
LEAR  Do.
FOOL  Mark it, nuncle:
       	Have more than thou showest.
       	Speak less than thou knowest,
       	Lend less than thou owest,
       	Ride more than thou goest,
       	Learn more than thou trowest,
       	Set less than thou throwest;
       	Leave thy drink and thy whore
       	And keep in-a-door,
       	And thou shalt have more
       	Than two tens to a score.
KENT  This is nothing, Fool.
FOOL  Then ’tis like the breath of an unfee’d lawyer.
You gave me nothing for ’t.—Can you make no use
of nothing, nuncle?
LEAR  Why no, boy. Nothing can be made out of
nothing.
FOOL, to Kent  Prithee tell him, so much the rent of his
land comes to. He will not believe a Fool.
LEAR  A bitter Fool!
FOOL  Dost know the difference, my boy, between a
bitter fool and a sweet one?
LEAR  No, lad, teach me.
FOOL	That lord that counseled thee
       	   To give away thy land,
       	Come place him here by me;
       	   Do thou for him stand.
       	The sweet and bitter fool
       	   Will presently appear:
       	The one in motley here,
       	   The other found out there.
LEAR  Dost thou call me “fool,” boy?
FOOL  All thy other titles thou hast given away. That
thou wast born with.
KENT  This is not altogether fool, my lord.
FOOL  No, faith, lords and great men will not let me. If
I had a monopoly out, they would have part on ’t.
And ladies too, they will not let me have all the fool
to myself; they’ll be snatching.—Nuncle, give me
an egg, and I’ll give thee two crowns.
LEAR  What two crowns shall they be?
FOOL  Why, after I have cut the egg i’ th’ middle and eat
up the meat, the two crowns of the egg. When thou
clovest thy crown i’ th’ middle and gav’st away
both parts, thou bor’st thine ass on thy back o’er
the dirt. Thou hadst little wit in thy bald crown
when thou gav’st thy golden one away. If I speak
like myself in this, let him be whipped that first
finds it so. Sings.
       	Fools had ne’er less grace in a year,
       	   For wise men are grown foppish
       	And know not how their wits to wear,
       	   Their manners are so apish.
LEAR  When were you wont to be so full of songs,
sirrah?
FOOL  I have used it, nuncle, e’er since thou mad’st thy
daughters thy mothers. For when thou gav’st them
the rod and put’st down thine own breeches,
Sings.
       	Then they for sudden joy did weep,
       	   And I for sorrow sung,
       	That such a king should play bo-peep
       	   And go the fools among.
Prithee, nuncle, keep a schoolmaster that can teach
thy Fool to lie. I would fain learn to lie.
LEAR  An you lie, sirrah, we’ll have you whipped.
FOOL  I marvel what kin thou and thy daughters are.
They’ll have me whipped for speaking true, thou ’lt
have me whipped for lying, and sometimes I am
whipped for holding my peace. I had rather be any
kind o’ thing than a Fool. And yet I would not be
thee, nuncle. Thou hast pared thy wit o’ both sides
and left nothing i’ th’ middle. Here comes one o’ the
parings.
 
Enter Goneril.
 
LEAR
How now, daughter? What makes that frontlet on?
Methinks you are too much of late i’ th’ frown.
FOOL  Thou wast a pretty fellow when thou hadst no
need to care for her frowning. Now thou art an O
without a figure. I am better than thou art now. I
am a Fool. Thou art nothing. To Goneril. Yes,
forsooth, I will hold my tongue. So your face bids
me, though you say nothing.
       	Mum, mum,
       	He that keeps nor crust nor crumb,
       	Weary of all, shall want some.
He points at Lear.
That’s a shelled peascod.
GONERIL
Not only, sir, this your all-licensed Fool,
But other of your insolent retinue
Do hourly carp and quarrel, breaking forth
In rank and not-to-be-endurèd riots. Sir,
I had thought by making this well known unto you
To have found a safe redress, but now grow fearful,
By what yourself too late have spoke and done,
That you protect this course and put it on
By your allowance; which if you should, the fault
Would not ’scape censure, nor the redresses sleep
Which in the tender of a wholesome weal
Might in their working do you that offense,
Which else were shame, that then necessity
Will call discreet proceeding.
FOOL  For you know, nuncle,
       	The hedge-sparrow fed the cuckoo so long,
       	That it’s had it head bit off by it young.
So out went the candle, and we were left darkling.
LEAR  Are you our daughter?
GONERIL
I would you would make use of your good wisdom,
Whereof I know you are fraught, and put away
These dispositions which of late transport you
From what you rightly are.
FOOL  May not an ass know when the cart draws the
horse? Whoop, Jug, I love thee!
LEAR
Does any here know me? This is not Lear.
Does Lear walk thus, speak thus? Where are his
eyes?
Either his notion weakens, his discernings
Are lethargied—Ha! Waking? ’Tis not so.
Who is it that can tell me who I am?
FOOL  Lear’s shadow.
LEAR
I would learn that, for, by the marks of
sovereignty,
Knowledge, and reason, I should be false persuaded
I had daughters.
FOOL  Which they will make an obedient father.
LEAR  Your name, fair gentlewoman?
GONERIL
This admiration, sir, is much o’ th’ savor
Of other your new pranks. I do beseech you
To understand my purposes aright.
As you are old and reverend, should be wise.
Here do you keep a hundred knights and squires,
Men so disordered, so debauched and bold,
That this our court, infected with their manners,
Shows like a riotous inn. Epicurism and lust
Makes it more like a tavern or a brothel
Than a graced palace. The shame itself doth speak
For instant remedy. Be then desired,
By her that else will take the thing she begs,
A little to disquantity your train,
And the remainders that shall still depend
To be such men as may besort your age,
Which know themselves and you.
LEAR  Darkness and
devils!—
Saddle my horses. Call my train together.
Some exit.
Degenerate bastard, I’ll not trouble thee.
Yet have I left a daughter.
GONERIL
You strike my people, and your disordered rabble
Make servants of their betters.
 
Enter Albany.
 
LEAR
Woe that too late repents!—O, sir, are you
come?
Is it your will? Speak, sir.—Prepare my horses.
Some exit.
Ingratitude, thou marble-hearted fiend,
More hideous when thou show’st thee in a child
Than the sea monster!
ALBANY  Pray, sir, be patient.
LEAR, to Goneril  Detested kite, thou liest.
My train are men of choice and rarest parts,
That all particulars of duty know
And in the most exact regard support
The worships of their name. O most small fault,
How ugly didst thou in Cordelia show,
Which, like an engine, wrenched my frame of
nature
From the fixed place, drew from my heart all love
And added to the gall! O Lear, Lear, Lear!
He strikes his head.
Beat at this gate that let thy folly in
And thy dear judgment out. Go, go, my people.
Some exit.
ALBANY
My lord, I am guiltless as I am ignorant
Of what hath moved you.
LEAR  It may be so, my lord.—
Hear, Nature, hear, dear goddess, hear!
Suspend thy purpose if thou didst intend
To make this creature fruitful.
Into her womb convey sterility.
Dry up in her the organs of increase,
And from her derogate body never spring
A babe to honor her. If she must teem,
Create her child of spleen, that it may live
And be a thwart disnatured torment to her.
Let it stamp wrinkles in her brow of youth,
With cadent tears fret channels in her cheeks,
Turn all her mother’s pains and benefits
To laughter and contempt, that she may feel
How sharper than a serpent’s tooth it is
To have a thankless child.—Away, away!
Lear and the rest of his train exit.
ALBANY
Now, gods that we adore, whereof comes this?
GONERIL
Never afflict yourself to know more of it,
But let his disposition have that scope
As dotage gives it.
 
Enter Lear and the Fool.
 
LEAR
What, fifty of my followers at a clap?
Within a fortnight?
ALBANY  What’s the matter, sir?
LEAR
I’ll tell thee. To Goneril. Life and death! I am
ashamed
That thou hast power to shake my manhood thus,
That these hot tears, which break from me perforce,
Should make thee worth them. Blasts and fogs upon
thee!
Th’ untented woundings of a father’s curse
Pierce every sense about thee! Old fond eyes,
Beweep this cause again, I’ll pluck you out
And cast you, with the waters that you loose,
To temper clay. Yea, is ’t come to this?
Ha! Let it be so. I have another daughter
Who, I am sure, is kind and comfortable.
When she shall hear this of thee, with her nails
She’ll flay thy wolvish visage. Thou shalt find
That I’ll resume the shape which thou dost think
I have cast off forever.                                                         	
He exits.
GONERIL  Do you mark that?
ALBANY
I cannot be so partial, Goneril,
To the great love I bear you—
GONERIL  Pray you, content.—What, Oswald, ho!—
You, sir, more knave than Fool, after your master.
FOOL  Nuncle Lear, Nuncle Lear, tarry. Take the Fool
with thee.
       	A fox, when one has caught her,
       	And such a daughter,
       	Should sure to the slaughter,
       	If my cap would buy a halter.
                                                                   	
So the Fool follows after. He exits.
GONERIL
This man hath had good counsel. A hundred
knights!
’Tis politic and safe to let him keep
At point a hundred knights! Yes, that on every
dream,
Each buzz, each fancy, each complaint, dislike,
He may enguard his dotage with their powers
And hold our lives in mercy.—Oswald, I say!
ALBANY  Well, you may fear too far.
GONERIL  Safer than trust too far.
Let me still take away the harms I fear,
Not fear still to be taken. I know his heart.
What he hath uttered I have writ my sister.
If she sustain him and his hundred knights
When I have showed th’ unfitness—
 
Enter Oswald, the Steward.
 
How now, Oswald?
What, have you writ that letter to my sister?
OSWALD  Ay, madam.
GONERIL
Take you some company and away to horse.
Inform her full of my particular fear,
And thereto add such reasons of your own
As may compact it more. Get you gone,
And hasten your return. Oswald exits. No, no, my
lord,
This milky gentleness and course of yours,
Though I condemn not, yet, under pardon,
You are much more at task for want of wisdom
Than praised for harmful mildness.
ALBANY
How far your eyes may pierce I cannot tell.
Striving to better, oft we mar what’s well.
GONERIL  Nay, then—
ALBANY  Well, well, th’ event.
They exit.
 
Scene 5
Enter Lear, Kent in disguise, Gentleman, and Fool.
 
LEAR, to Kent  Go you before to Gloucester with these
letters. Acquaint my daughter no further with anything
you know than comes from her demand out of
the letter. If your diligence be not speedy, I shall be
there afore you.
KENT  I will not sleep, my lord, till I have delivered
your letter.                                                                          	
He exits.
FOOL  If a man’s brains were in ’s heels, were ’t not in
danger of kibes?
LEAR  Ay, boy.
FOOL  Then, I prithee, be merry; thy wit shall not go
slipshod.
LEAR  Ha, ha, ha!
FOOL  Shalt see thy other daughter will use thee kindly,
for, though she’s as like this as a crab’s like an
apple, yet I can tell what I can tell.
LEAR  What canst tell, boy?
FOOL  She will taste as like this as a crab does to a crab.
Thou canst tell why one’s nose stands i’ th’ middle
on ’s face?
LEAR  No.
FOOL  Why, to keep one’s eyes of either side ’s nose,
that what a man cannot smell out he may spy into.
LEAR  I did her wrong.
FOOL  Canst tell how an oyster makes his shell?
LEAR  No.
FOOL  Nor I neither. But I can tell why a snail has a
house.
LEAR  Why?
FOOL  Why, to put ’s head in, not to give it away to his
daughters and leave his horns without a case.
LEAR  I will forget my nature. So kind a father!—Be
my horses ready?                                                  	
Gentleman exits.
FOOL  Thy asses are gone about ’em. The reason why
the seven stars are no more than seven is a pretty
reason.
LEAR  Because they are not eight.
FOOL  Yes, indeed. Thou wouldst make a good Fool.
LEAR  To take ’t again perforce! Monster ingratitude!
FOOL  If thou wert my Fool, nuncle, I’d have thee
beaten for being old before thy time.
LEAR  How’s that?
FOOL  Thou shouldst not have been old till thou hadst
been wise.
LEAR
O, let me not be mad, not mad, sweet heaven!
Keep me in temper. I would not be mad!
 
Enter Gentleman.
 
How now, are the horses ready?
GENTLEMAN  Ready, my lord.
LEAR  Come, boy.
FOOL
She that’s a maid now and laughs at my departure,
Shall not be a maid long, unless things be cut
shorter.
They exit.
 
 
 

 
 
ACT 2
 
Scene 1
Enter Edmund, the Bastard and Curan, severally.
 
EDMUND  Save thee, Curan.
CURAN  And you, sir. I have been with your father and
given him notice that the Duke of Cornwall and
Regan his duchess will be here with him this night.
EDMUND  How comes that?
CURAN  Nay, I know not. You have heard of the news
abroad?—I mean the whispered ones, for they are
yet but ear-kissing arguments.
EDMUND  Not I. Pray you, what are they?
CURAN  Have you heard of no likely wars toward ’twixt
the dukes of Cornwall and Albany?
EDMUND  Not a word.
CURAN  You may do, then, in time. Fare you well, sir.
He exits.
EDMUND
The Duke be here tonight? The better, best.
This weaves itself perforce into my business.
My father hath set guard to take my brother,
And I have one thing of a queasy question
Which I must act. Briefness and fortune work!—
Brother, a word. Descend. Brother, I say!
 
Enter Edgar.
 
My father watches. O sir, fly this place!
Intelligence is given where you are hid.
You have now the good advantage of the night.
Have you not spoken ’gainst the Duke of Cornwall?
He’s coming hither, now, i’ th’ night, i’ th’ haste,
And Regan with him. Have you nothing said
Upon his party ’gainst the Duke of Albany?
Advise yourself.
EDGAR  I am sure on ’t, not a word.
EDMUND
I hear my father coming. Pardon me.
In cunning I must draw my sword upon you.
Draw. Seem to defend yourself. Now, quit you
well.                                                                                	
They draw.
Yield! Come before my father! Light, hoa, here!
Aside to Edgar. Fly, brother.—Torches, torches!
—So, farewell.                                                             	
Edgar exits.
Some blood drawn on me would beget opinion
Of my more fierce endeavor. I have seen drunkards
Do more than this in sport.                                	
He wounds his arm.
Father, father!
Stop, stop! No help?
 
Enter Gloucester, and Servants with torches.
 
GLOUCESTER  Now, Edmund, where’s the
villain?
EDMUND
Here stood he in the dark, his sharp sword out,
Mumbling of wicked charms, conjuring the moon
To stand auspicious mistress.
GLOUCESTER  But where is he?
EDMUND
Look, sir, I bleed.
GLOUCESTER  Where is the villain,
Edmund?
EDMUND
Fled this way, sir, when by no means he could—
GLOUCESTER
Pursue him, ho! Go after. Servants exit. By no
means what?
EDMUND
Persuade me to the murder of your Lordship,
But that I told him the revenging gods
’Gainst parricides did all the thunder bend,
Spoke with how manifold and strong a bond
The child was bound to th’ father—sir, in fine,
Seeing how loathly opposite I stood
To his unnatural purpose, in fell motion
With his preparèd sword he charges home
My unprovided body, lanced mine arm;
And when he saw my best alarumed spirits,
Bold in the quarrel’s right, roused to th’ encounter,
Or whether ghasted by the noise I made,
Full suddenly he fled.
GLOUCESTER  Let him fly far!
Not in this land shall he remain uncaught,
And found—dispatch. The noble duke my master,
My worthy arch and patron, comes tonight.
By his authority I will proclaim it
That he which finds him shall deserve our thanks,
Bringing the murderous coward to the stake;
He that conceals him, death.
EDMUND
When I dissuaded him from his intent
And found him pight to do it, with curst speech
I threatened to discover him. He replied
“Thou unpossessing bastard, dost thou think
If I would stand against thee, would the reposal
Of any trust, virtue, or worth in thee
Make thy words faithed? No. What I should
deny—
As this I would, though thou didst produce
My very character—I’d turn it all
To thy suggestion, plot, and damnèd practice.
And thou must make a dullard of the world
If they not thought the profits of my death
Were very pregnant and potential spurs
To make thee seek it.”
GLOUCESTER  O strange and fastened villain!
Would he deny his letter, said he?
I never got him. Tucket within.
Hark, the Duke’s trumpets. I know not why he
comes.
All ports I’ll bar. The villain shall not ’scape.
The Duke must grant me that. Besides, his picture
I will send far and near, that all the kingdom
May have due note of him. And of my land,
Loyal and natural boy, I’ll work the means
To make thee capable.
 
Enter Cornwall, Regan, and Attendants.
 
CORNWALL
How now, my noble friend? Since I came hither,
Which I can call but now, I have heard strange
news.
REGAN
If it be true, all vengeance comes too short
Which can pursue th’ offender. How dost, my
lord?
GLOUCESTER
O madam, my old heart is cracked; it’s cracked.
REGAN
What, did my father’s godson seek your life?
He whom my father named, your Edgar?
GLOUCESTER
O lady, lady, shame would have it hid!
REGAN
Was he not companion with the riotous knights
That tended upon my father?
GLOUCESTER
I know not, madam. ’Tis too bad, too bad.
EDMUND
Yes, madam, he was of that consort.
REGAN
No marvel, then, though he were ill affected.
’Tis they have put him on the old man’s death,
To have th’ expense and waste of his revenues.
I have this present evening from my sister
Been well informed of them, and with such cautions
That if they come to sojourn at my house
I’ll not be there.
CORNWALL  Nor I, assure thee, Regan.—
Edmund, I hear that you have shown your father
A childlike office.
EDMUND  It was my duty, sir.
GLOUCESTER
He did bewray his practice, and received
This hurt you see striving to apprehend him.
CORNWALL  Is he pursued?
GLOUCESTER  Ay, my good lord.
CORNWALL
If he be taken, he shall never more
Be feared of doing harm. Make your own purpose,
How in my strength you please.—For you, Edmund,
Whose virtue and obedience doth this instant
So much commend itself, you shall be ours.
Natures of such deep trust we shall much need.
You we first seize on.
EDMUND  I shall serve you, sir,
Truly, however else.
GLOUCESTER  For him I thank your Grace.
CORNWALL
You know not why we came to visit you—
REGAN
Thus out of season, threading dark-eyed night.
Occasions, noble Gloucester, of some poise,
Wherein we must have use of your advice.
Our father he hath writ, so hath our sister,
Of differences, which I best thought it fit
To answer from our home. The several messengers
From hence attend dispatch. Our good old friend,
Lay comforts to your bosom and bestow
Your needful counsel to our businesses,
Which craves the instant use.
GLOUCESTER  I serve you, madam.
Your Graces are right welcome.
Flourish. They exit.
 
Scene 2
Enter Kent in disguise and Oswald, the Steward,
severally.
 
OSWALD  Good dawning to thee, friend. Art of this
house?
KENT  Ay.
OSWALD  Where may we set our horses?
KENT  I’ th’ mire.
OSWALD  Prithee, if thou lov’st me, tell me.
KENT  I love thee not.
OSWALD  Why then, I care not for thee.
KENT  If I had thee in Lipsbury pinfold, I would make
thee care for me.
OSWALD  Why dost thou use me thus? I know thee not.
KENT  Fellow, I know thee.
OSWALD  What dost thou know me for?
KENT  A knave, a rascal, an eater of broken meats; a
base, proud, shallow, beggarly, three-suited, hundred-pound,
filthy worsted-stocking knave; a lily-livered,
action-taking, whoreson, glass-gazing, superserviceable,
finical rogue; one-trunk-inheriting
slave; one that wouldst be a bawd in way of good
service, and art nothing but the composition of a
knave, beggar, coward, pander, and the son and heir
of a mongrel bitch; one whom I will beat into
clamorous whining if thou deny’st the least syllable
of thy addition.
OSWALD  Why, what a monstrous fellow art thou thus
to rail on one that is neither known of thee nor
knows thee!
KENT  What a brazen-faced varlet art thou to deny thou
knowest me! Is it two days ago since I tripped up
thy heels and beat thee before the King? He draws
his sword. Draw, you rogue, for though it be night,
yet the moon shines. I’ll make a sop o’ th’ moonshine
of you, you whoreson, cullionly barbermonger.
Draw!
OSWALD  Away! I have nothing to do with thee.
KENT  Draw, you rascal! You come with letters against
the King and take Vanity the puppet’s part against
the royalty of her father. Draw, you rogue, or I’ll so
carbonado your shanks! Draw, you rascal! Come
your ways.
OSWALD  Help, ho! Murder! Help!
KENT  Strike, you slave! Stand, rogue! Stand, you neat
slave! Strike! He beats Oswald.
OSWALD  Help, ho! Murder, murder!
 
Enter Bastard Edmund, with his rapier drawn,
Cornwall, Regan, Gloucester, Servants.
 
EDMUND  How now, what’s the matter? Part!
KENT  With you, goodman boy, if you please. Come, I’ll
flesh you. Come on, young master.
GLOUCESTER
Weapons? Arms? What’s the matter here?
CORNWALL  Keep peace, upon your lives! He dies that
strikes again. What is the matter?
REGAN
The messengers from our sister and the King.
CORNWALL  What is your difference? Speak.
OSWALD  I am scarce in breath, my lord.
KENT  No marvel, you have so bestirred your valor.
You cowardly rascal, nature disclaims in thee; a
tailor made thee.
CORNWALL  Thou art a strange fellow. A tailor make a
man?
KENT  A tailor, sir. A stonecutter or a painter could not
have made him so ill, though they had been but two
years o’ th’ trade.
CORNWALL  Speak yet, how grew your quarrel?
OSWALD  This ancient ruffian, sir, whose life I have
spared at suit of his gray beard—
KENT  Thou whoreson zed, thou unnecessary letter!
—My lord, if you will give me leave, I will tread
this unbolted villain into mortar and daub the wall
of a jakes with him.—Spare my gray beard, you
wagtail?
CORNWALL  Peace, sirrah!
You beastly knave, know you no reverence?
KENT
Yes, sir, but anger hath a privilege.
CORNWALL  Why art thou angry?
KENT
That such a slave as this should wear a sword,
Who wears no honesty. Such smiling rogues as
these,
Like rats, oft bite the holy cords atwain
Which are too intrinse t’ unloose; smooth every
passion
That in the natures of their lords rebel—
Being oil to fire, snow to the colder moods—
Renege, affirm, and turn their halcyon beaks
With every gale and vary of their masters,
Knowing naught, like dogs, but following.—
A plague upon your epileptic visage!
Smile you my speeches, as I were a fool?
Goose, if I had you upon Sarum plain,
I’d drive you cackling home to Camelot.
CORNWALL  What, art thou mad, old fellow?
GLOUCESTER  How fell you out? Say that.
KENT
No contraries hold more antipathy
Than I and such a knave.
CORNWALL
Why dost thou call him “knave”? What is his fault?
KENT  His countenance likes me not.
CORNWALL
No more, perchance, does mine, nor his, nor hers.
KENT
Sir, ’tis my occupation to be plain:
I have seen better faces in my time
Than stands on any shoulder that I see
Before me at this instant.
CORNWALL  This is some fellow
Who, having been praised for bluntness, doth affect
A saucy roughness and constrains the garb
Quite from his nature. He cannot flatter, he.
An honest mind and plain, he must speak truth!
An they will take it, so; if not, he’s plain.
These kind of knaves I know, which in this
plainness
Harbor more craft and more corrupter ends
Than twenty silly-ducking observants
That stretch their duties nicely.
KENT
Sir, in good faith, in sincere verity,
Under th’ allowance of your great aspect,
Whose influence, like the wreath of radiant fire
On flick’ring Phoebus’ front—
CORNWALL  What mean’st by this?
KENT  To go out of my dialect, which you discommend
so much. I know, sir, I am no flatterer. He that
beguiled you in a plain accent was a plain knave,
which for my part I will not be, though I should
win your displeasure to entreat me to ’t.
CORNWALL, to Oswald  What was th’ offense you gave
him?
OSWALD  I never gave him any.
It pleased the King his master very late
To strike at me, upon his misconstruction;
When he, compact, and flattering his displeasure,
Tripped me behind; being down, insulted, railed,
And put upon him such a deal of man
That worthied him, got praises of the King
For him attempting who was self-subdued;
And in the fleshment of this dread exploit,
Drew on me here again.
KENT  None of these rogues and cowards
But Ajax is their fool.
CORNWALL  Fetch forth the stocks.—
You stubborn ancient knave, you reverent braggart,
We’ll teach you.
KENT  Sir, I am too old to learn.
Call not your stocks for me. I serve the King,
On whose employment I was sent to you.
You shall do small respect, show too bold
malice
Against the grace and person of my master,
Stocking his messenger.
CORNWALL
Fetch forth the stocks.—As I have life and honor,
There shall he sit till noon.
REGAN
Till noon? Till night, my lord, and all night, too.
KENT
Why, madam, if I were your father’s dog,
You should not use me so.
REGAN  Sir, being his knave, I will.
CORNWALL
This is a fellow of the selfsame color
Our sister speaks of.—Come, bring away the stocks.
Stocks brought out.
GLOUCESTER
Let me beseech your Grace not to do so.
His fault is much, and the good king his master
Will check him for ’t. Your purposed low correction
Is such as basest and contemned’st wretches
For pilf’rings and most common trespasses
Are punished with. The King must take it ill
That he, so slightly valued in his messenger,
Should have him thus restrained.
CORNWALL  I’ll answer that.
REGAN
My sister may receive it much more worse
To have her gentleman abused, assaulted
For following her affairs.—Put in his legs.
Kent is put in the stocks.
CORNWALL  Come, my good lord, away.
All but Gloucester and Kent exit.
GLOUCESTER
I am sorry for thee, friend. ’Tis the Duke’s
pleasure,
Whose disposition all the world well knows
Will not be rubbed nor stopped. I’ll entreat for thee.
KENT
Pray, do not, sir. I have watched and traveled hard.
Some time I shall sleep out; the rest I’ll whistle.
A good man’s fortune may grow out at heels.
Give you good morrow.
GLOUCESTER
The Duke’s to blame in this. ’Twill be ill taken.
He exits.
KENT
Good king, that must approve the common saw,
Thou out of heaven’s benediction com’st
To the warm sun.  He takes out a paper.
Approach, thou beacon to this under globe,
That by thy comfortable beams I may
Peruse this letter. Nothing almost sees miracles
But misery. I know ’tis from Cordelia,
Who hath most fortunately been informed
Of my obscurèd course, and shall find time
From this enormous state, seeking to give
Losses their remedies. All weary and o’erwatched,
Take vantage, heavy eyes, not to behold
This shameful lodging.
Fortune, good night. Smile once more; turn thy
wheel.
Sleeps.
 
Scene 3
Enter Edgar.
 
EDGAR  I heard myself proclaimed,
And by the happy hollow of a tree
Escaped the hunt. No port is free; no place
That guard and most unusual vigilance
Does not attend my taking. Whiles I may ’scape,
I will preserve myself, and am bethought
To take the basest and most poorest shape
That ever penury in contempt of man
Brought near to beast. My face I’ll grime with filth,
Blanket my loins, elf all my hairs in knots,
And with presented nakedness outface
The winds and persecutions of the sky.
The country gives me proof and precedent
Of Bedlam beggars who with roaring voices
Strike in their numbed and mortifièd arms
Pins, wooden pricks, nails, sprigs of rosemary,
And, with this horrible object, from low farms,
Poor pelting villages, sheepcotes, and mills,
Sometime with lunatic bans, sometime with prayers,
Enforce their charity. “Poor Turlygod! Poor Tom!”
That’s something yet. “Edgar” I nothing am.
He exits.
 
Scene 4
Enter Lear, Fool, and Gentleman.
 
LEAR
’Tis strange that they should so depart from home
And not send back my messenger.
GENTLEMAN  As I learned,
The night before there was no purpose in them
Of this remove.
KENT, waking  Hail to thee, noble master.
LEAR  Ha?
Mak’st thou this shame thy pastime?
KENT  No, my lord.
FOOL  Ha, ha, he wears cruel garters. Horses are tied
by the heads, dogs and bears by th’ neck, monkeys
by th’ loins, and men by th’ legs. When a man’s
overlusty at legs, then he wears wooden
netherstocks.
LEAR
What’s he that hath so much thy place mistook
To set thee here?
KENT  It is both he and she,
Your son and daughter.
LEAR  No.
KENT  Yes.
LEAR  No, I say.
KENT  I say yea.
LEAR  By Jupiter, I swear no.
KENTBy Juno, I swear ay.
LEAR  They durst not do ’t.
They could not, would not do ’t. ’Tis worse than
murder
To do upon respect such violent outrage.
Resolve me with all modest haste which way
Thou might’st deserve or they impose this usage,
Coming from us.
KENT  My lord, when at their home
I did commend your Highness’ letters to them,
Ere I was risen from the place that showed
My duty kneeling, came there a reeking post,
Stewed in his haste, half breathless, panting forth
From Goneril his mistress salutations;
Delivered letters, spite of intermission,
Which presently they read; on whose contents
They summoned up their meiny, straight took
horse,
Commanded me to follow and attend
The leisure of their answer, gave me cold looks;
And meeting here the other messenger,
Whose welcome, I perceived, had poisoned mine,
Being the very fellow which of late
Displayed so saucily against your Highness,
Having more man than wit about me, drew.
He raised the house with loud and coward cries.
Your son and daughter found this trespass worth
The shame which here it suffers.
FOOL  Winter’s not gone yet if the wild geese fly that
way.
       	Fathers that wear rags
       	   Do make their children blind,
       	But fathers that bear bags
       	   Shall see their children kind.
       	Fortune, that arrant whore,
       	Ne’er turns the key to th’ poor.
But, for all this, thou shalt have as many dolors for
thy daughters as thou canst tell in a year.
LEAR
O, how this mother swells up toward my heart!
Hysterica passio, down, thou climbing sorrow!
Thy element’s below.—Where is this daughter?
KENT  With the Earl, sir, here within.
LEAR, to Fool and Gentleman  Follow me not. Stay
here. He exits.
GENTLEMAN
Made you no more offense but what you speak of?
KENT  None.
How chance the King comes with so small a number?
FOOL  An thou hadst been set i’ th’ stocks for that
question, thou ’dst well deserved it.
KENT  Why, Fool?
FOOL  We’ll set thee to school to an ant to teach thee
there’s no laboring i’ th’ winter. All that follow
their noses are led by their eyes but blind men, and
there’s not a nose among twenty but can smell him
that’s stinking. Let go thy hold when a great wheel
runs down a hill lest it break thy neck with following;
but the great one that goes upward, let him
draw thee after. When a wise man gives thee better
counsel, give me mine again. I would have none but
knaves follow it, since a Fool gives it.
       	That sir which serves and seeks for gain,
       	   And follows but for form,
       	Will pack when it begins to rain
       	   And leave thee in the storm.
       	But I will tarry; the Fool will stay,
       	   And let the wise man fly.
       	The knave turns fool that runs away;
       	   The Fool no knave, perdie.
KENT  Where learned you this, Fool?
FOOL  Not i’ th’ stocks, fool.
 
Enter Lear and Gloucester.
 
LEAR
Deny to speak with me? They are sick? They are
weary?
They have traveled all the night? Mere fetches,
The images of revolt and flying off.
Fetch me a better answer.
GLOUCESTER  My dear lord,
You know the fiery quality of the Duke,
How unremovable and fixed he is
In his own course.
LEAR
Vengeance, plague, death, confusion!
“Fiery”? What “quality”? Why Gloucester,
Gloucester,
I’d speak with the Duke of Cornwall and his wife.
GLOUCESTER
Well, my good lord, I have informed them so.
LEAR
“Informed them”? Dost thou understand me,
man?
GLOUCESTER  Ay, my good lord.
LEAR
The King would speak with Cornwall. The dear
father
Would with his daughter speak, commands, tends
service.
Are they “informed” of this? My breath and
blood!
“Fiery”? The “fiery” duke? Tell the hot duke that—
No, but not yet. Maybe he is not well.
Infirmity doth still neglect all office
Whereto our health is bound. We are not ourselves
When nature, being oppressed, commands the mind
To suffer with the body. I’ll forbear,
And am fallen out with my more headier will,
To take the indisposed and sickly fit
For the sound man. Noticing Kent again. Death on
my state! Wherefore
Should he sit here? This act persuades me
That this remotion of the Duke and her
Is practice only. Give me my servant forth.
Go tell the Duke and ’s wife I’d speak with them.
Now, presently, bid them come forth and hear me,
Or at their chamber door I’ll beat the drum
Till it cry sleep to death.
GLOUCESTER  I would have all well betwixt you.
He exits.
LEAR
O me, my heart, my rising heart! But down!
FOOL  Cry to it, nuncle, as the cockney did to the eels
when she put ’em i’ th’ paste alive. She knapped
’em o’ th’ coxcombs with a stick and cried “Down,
wantons, down!” ’Twas her brother that in pure
kindness to his horse buttered his hay.
 
Enter Cornwall, Regan, Gloucester, Servants.
 
LEAR  Good morrow to you both.
CORNWALL  Hail to your Grace.
Kent here set at liberty.
REGAN  I am glad to see your Highness.
LEAR
Regan, I think you are. I know what reason
I have to think so: if thou shouldst not be glad,
I would divorce me from thy mother’s tomb,
Sepulch’ring an adult’ress. To Kent. O, are you
free?
Some other time for that.—Belovèd Regan,
Thy sister’s naught. O Regan, she hath tied
Sharp-toothed unkindness, like a vulture, here.
I can scarce speak to thee. Thou ’lt not believe
With how depraved a quality—O Regan!
REGAN
I pray you, sir, take patience. I have hope
You less know how to value her desert
Than she to scant her duty.
LEAR  Say? How is that?
REGAN
I cannot think my sister in the least
Would fail her obligation. If, sir, perchance
She have restrained the riots of your followers,
’Tis on such ground and to such wholesome end
As clears her from all blame.
LEAR  My curses on her.
REGAN  O sir, you are old.
Nature in you stands on the very verge
Of his confine. You should be ruled and led
By some discretion that discerns your state
Better than you yourself. Therefore, I pray you
That to our sister you do make return.
Say you have wronged her.
LEAR  Ask her forgiveness?
Do you but mark how this becomes the house:
He kneels.
“Dear daughter, I confess that I am old.
Age is unnecessary. On my knees I beg
That you’ll vouchsafe me raiment, bed, and food.”
REGAN
Good sir, no more. These are unsightly tricks.
Return you to my sister.
LEAR, rising  Never, Regan.
She hath abated me of half my train,
Looked black upon me, struck me with her tongue
Most serpentlike upon the very heart.
All the stored vengeances of heaven fall
On her ingrateful top! Strike her young bones,
You taking airs, with lameness!
CORNWALL  Fie, sir, fie!
LEAR
You nimble lightnings, dart your blinding flames
Into her scornful eyes! Infect her beauty,
You fen-sucked fogs drawn by the powerful sun
To fall and blister!
REGAN
O, the blest gods! So will you wish on me
When the rash mood is on.
LEAR
No, Regan, thou shalt never have my curse.
Thy tender-hefted nature shall not give
Thee o’er to harshness. Her eyes are fierce, but
thine
Do comfort and not burn. ’Tis not in thee
To grudge my pleasures, to cut off my train,
To bandy hasty words, to scant my sizes,
And, in conclusion, to oppose the bolt
Against my coming in. Thou better know’st
The offices of nature, bond of childhood,
Effects of courtesy, dues of gratitude.
Thy half o’ th’ kingdom hast thou not forgot,
Wherein I thee endowed.
REGAN  Good sir, to th’ purpose.
Tucket within.
LEAR
Who put my man i’ th’ stocks?
CORNWALL  What trumpet’s that?
REGAN
I know ’t—my sister’s. This approves her letter,
That she would soon be here.
 
Enter Oswald, the Steward.
 
Is your lady come?
LEAR
This is a slave whose easy-borrowed pride
Dwells in the fickle grace of her he follows.—
Out, varlet, from my sight!
CORNWALL  What means your Grace?
LEAR
Who stocked my servant? Regan, I have good hope
Thou didst not know on ’t.
 
Enter Goneril.
 
Who comes here? O heavens,
If you do love old men, if your sweet sway
Allow obedience, if you yourselves are old,
Make it your cause. Send down and take my part.
To Goneril. Art not ashamed to look upon this
beard? Regan takes Goneril’s hand.
O Regan, will you take her by the hand?
GONERIL
Why not by th’ hand, sir? How have I offended?
All’s not offense that indiscretion finds
And dotage terms so.
LEAR  O sides, you are too tough!
Will you yet hold?—How came my man i’ th’
stocks?
CORNWALL
I set him there, sir, but his own disorders
Deserved much less advancement.
LEAR  You? Did you?
REGAN
I pray you, father, being weak, seem so.
If till the expiration of your month
You will return and sojourn with my sister,
Dismissing half your train, come then to me.
I am now from home and out of that provision
Which shall be needful for your entertainment.
LEAR
Return to her? And fifty men dismissed?
No! Rather I abjure all roofs, and choose
To wage against the enmity o’ th’ air,
To be a comrade with the wolf and owl,
Necessity’s sharp pinch. Return with her?
Why the hot-blooded France, that dowerless took
Our youngest born—I could as well be brought
To knee his throne and, squire-like, pension beg
To keep base life afoot. Return with her?
Persuade me rather to be slave and sumpter
To this detested groom. He indicates Oswald.
GONERIL  At your choice, sir.
LEAR
I prithee, daughter, do not make me mad.
I will not trouble thee, my child. Farewell.
We’ll no more meet, no more see one another.
But yet thou art my flesh, my blood, my daughter,
Or, rather, a disease that’s in my flesh,
Which I must needs call mine. Thou art a boil,
A plague-sore or embossèd carbuncle
In my corrupted blood. But I’ll not chide thee.
Let shame come when it will; I do not call it.
I do not bid the thunder-bearer shoot,
Nor tell tales of thee to high-judging Jove.
Mend when thou canst. Be better at thy leisure.
I can be patient. I can stay with Regan,
I and my hundred knights.
REGAN  Not altogether so.
I looked not for you yet, nor am provided
For your fit welcome. Give ear, sir, to my sister,
For those that mingle reason with your passion
Must be content to think you old, and so—
But she knows what she does.
LEAR  Is this well spoken?
REGAN
I dare avouch it, sir. What, fifty followers?
Is it not well? What should you need of more?
Yea, or so many, sith that both charge and danger
Speak ’gainst so great a number? How in one house
Should many people under two commands
Hold amity? ’Tis hard, almost impossible.
GONERIL
Why might not you, my lord, receive attendance
From those that she calls servants, or from mine?
REGAN
Why not, my lord? If then they chanced to slack
you,
We could control them. If you will come to me
(For now I spy a danger), I entreat you
To bring but five-and-twenty. To no more
Will I give place or notice.
LEAR  I gave you all—
REGAN  And in good time you gave it.
LEAR
Made you my guardians, my depositaries,
But kept a reservation to be followed
With such a number. What, must I come to you
With five-and-twenty? Regan, said you so?
REGAN
And speak ’t again, my lord. No more with me.
LEAR
Those wicked creatures yet do look well-favored
When others are more wicked. Not being the worst
Stands in some rank of praise. To Goneril. I’ll go
with thee.
Thy fifty yet doth double five-and-twenty,
And thou art twice her love.
GONERIL  Hear me, my lord.
What need you five-and-twenty, ten, or five,
To follow in a house where twice so many
Have a command to tend you?
REGAN  What need one?
LEAR
O, reason not the need! Our basest beggars
Are in the poorest thing superfluous.
Allow not nature more than nature needs,
Man’s life is cheap as beast’s. Thou art a lady;
If only to go warm were gorgeous,
Why, nature needs not what thou gorgeous wear’st,
Which scarcely keeps thee warm. But, for true
need—
You heavens, give me that patience, patience I need!
You see me here, you gods, a poor old man
As full of grief as age, wretched in both.
If it be you that stirs these daughters’ hearts
Against their father, fool me not so much
To bear it tamely. Touch me with noble anger,
And let not women’s weapons, water drops,
Stain my man’s cheeks.—No, you unnatural hags,
I will have such revenges on you both
That all the world shall—I will do such things—
What they are yet I know not, but they shall be
The terrors of the Earth! You think I’ll weep.
No, I’ll not weep.
I have full cause of weeping, but this heart
Storm and tempest.
Shall break into a hundred thousand flaws
Or ere I’ll weep.—O Fool, I shall go mad!
Lear, Kent, and Fool exit
with Gloucester and the Gentleman.
CORNWALL  Let us withdraw. ’Twill be a storm.
REGAN
This house is little. The old man and ’s people
Cannot be well bestowed.
GONERIL
’Tis his own blame hath put himself from rest,
And must needs taste his folly.
REGAN
For his particular, I’ll receive him gladly,
But not one follower.
GONERIL
So am I purposed. Where is my lord of Gloucester?
CORNWALL
Followed the old man forth.
 
Enter Gloucester.
 
He is returned.
GLOUCESTER  The King is in high rage.
CORNWALL  Whither is he going?
GLOUCESTER
He calls to horse, but will I know not whither.
CORNWALL
’Tis best to give him way. He leads himself.
GONERIL, to Gloucester
My lord, entreat him by no means to stay.
GLOUCESTER
Alack, the night comes on, and the high winds
Do sorely ruffle. For many miles about
There’s scarce a bush.
REGAN  O sir, to willful men
The injuries that they themselves procure
Must be their schoolmasters. Shut up your doors.
He is attended with a desperate train,
And what they may incense him to, being apt
To have his ear abused, wisdom bids fear.
CORNWALL
Shut up your doors, my lord. ’Tis a wild night.
My Regan counsels well. Come out o’ th’ storm.
They exit.
 
 
 

 
 
ACT 3
 
Scene 1
Storm still. Enter Kent in disguise, and a Gentleman,
severally.
 
KENT  Who’s there, besides foul weather?
GENTLEMAN
One minded like the weather, most unquietly.
KENT  I know you. Where’s the King?
GENTLEMAN
Contending with the fretful elements;
Bids the wind blow the earth into the sea
Or swell the curlèd waters ’bove the main,
That things might change or cease; tears his white
hair,
Which the impetuous blasts with eyeless rage
Catch in their fury and make nothing of;
Strives in his little world of man to outscorn
The to-and-fro conflicting wind and rain.
This night, wherein the cub-drawn bear would
couch,
The lion and the belly-pinchèd wolf
Keep their fur dry, unbonneted he runs
And bids what will take all.
KENT  But who is with him?
GENTLEMAN
None but the Fool, who labors to outjest
His heart-struck injuries.
KENT  Sir, I do know you
And dare upon the warrant of my note
Commend a dear thing to you. There is division,
Although as yet the face of it is covered
With mutual cunning, ’twixt Albany and Cornwall,
Who have—as who have not, that their great stars
Throned and set high?—servants, who seem no less,
Which are to France the spies and speculations
Intelligent of our state. From France there comes
a power
Into this scattered kingdom, who already,
Wise in our negligence, have secret feet
In some of our best ports and are at point
To show their open banner. Now to you:
If on my credit you dare build so far
To make your speed to Dover, you shall find
Some that will thank you, making just report
Of how unnatural and bemadding sorrow
The King hath cause to plain: what hath been seen,
Either in snuffs and packings of the dukes,
Or the hard rein which both of them hath borne
Against the old kind king, or something deeper,
Whereof perchance these are but furnishings.
I am a gentleman of blood and breeding,
And from some knowledge and assurance offer
This office to you.
GENTLEMAN
I will talk further with you.
KENT  No, do not.
For confirmation that I am much more
Than my outwall, open this purse and take
What it contains.
Kent hands him a purse and a ring.
If you shall see Cordelia
(As fear not but you shall), show her this ring,
And she will tell you who that fellow is
That yet you do not know. Fie on this storm!
I will go seek the King.
GENTLEMAN
Give me your hand. Have you no more to say?
KENT
Few words, but, to effect, more than all yet:
That when we have found the King—in which your
pain
That way, I’ll this—he that first lights on him
Holla the other.
They exit separately.
 
Scene 2
Storm still. Enter Lear and Fool.
 
LEAR
Blow winds, and crack your cheeks! Rage, blow!
You cataracts and hurricanoes, spout
Till you have drenched our steeples, drowned the
cocks.
You sulph’rous and thought-executing fires,
Vaunt-couriers of oak-cleaving thunderbolts,
Singe my white head. And thou, all-shaking
thunder,
Strike flat the thick rotundity o’ th’ world.
Crack nature’s molds, all germens spill at once
That makes ingrateful man.
FOOL  O nuncle, court holy water in a dry house is
better than this rainwater out o’ door. Good nuncle,
in. Ask thy daughters’ blessing. Here’s a night
pities neither wise men nor fools.
LEAR
Rumble thy bellyful! Spit, fire! Spout, rain!
Nor rain, wind, thunder, fire are my daughters.
I tax not you, you elements, with unkindness.
I never gave you kingdom, called you children;
You owe me no subscription. Then let fall
Your horrible pleasure. Here I stand your slave,
A poor, infirm, weak, and despised old man.
But yet I call you servile ministers,
That will with two pernicious daughters join
Your high-engendered battles ’gainst a head
So old and white as this. O, ho, ’tis foul!
FOOL  He that has a house to put ’s head in has a good
headpiece.
       	The codpiece that will house
       	   Before the head has any,
       	The head and he shall louse;
       	   So beggars marry many.
       	The man that makes his toe
       	   What he his heart should make,
       	Shall of a corn cry woe,
       	   And turn his sleep to wake.
For there was never yet fair woman but she made
mouths in a glass.
LEAR
No, I will be the pattern of all patience.
I will say nothing.
 
Enter Kent in disguise.
 
KENT  Who’s there?
FOOL  Marry, here’s grace and a codpiece; that’s a
wise man and a fool.
KENT
Alas, sir, are you here? Things that love night
Love not such nights as these. The wrathful skies
Gallow the very wanderers of the dark
And make them keep their caves. Since I was man,
Such sheets of fire, such bursts of horrid thunder,
Such groans of roaring wind and rain I never
Remember to have heard. Man’s nature cannot carry
Th’ affliction nor the fear.
LEAR  Let the great gods
That keep this dreadful pudder o’er our heads
Find out their enemies now. Tremble, thou wretch,
That hast within thee undivulgèd crimes
Unwhipped of justice. Hide thee, thou bloody hand,
Thou perjured, and thou simular of virtue
That art incestuous. Caitiff, to pieces shake,
That under covert and convenient seeming
Has practiced on man’s life. Close pent-up guilts,
Rive your concealing continents and cry
These dreadful summoners grace. I am a man
More sinned against than sinning.
KENT  Alack,
bareheaded?
Gracious my lord, hard by here is a hovel.
Some friendship will it lend you ’gainst the tempest.
Repose you there while I to this hard house—
More harder than the stones whereof ’tis raised,
Which even but now, demanding after you,
Denied me to come in—return and force
Their scanted courtesy.
LEAR  My wits begin to turn.—
Come on, my boy. How dost, my boy? Art cold?
I am cold myself.—Where is this straw, my fellow?
The art of our necessities is strange
And can make vile things precious. Come, your
hovel.—
Poor Fool and knave, I have one part in my heart
That’s sorry yet for thee.
FOOL sings
       	He that has and a little tiny wit,
       	   With hey, ho, the wind and the rain,
       	Must make content with his fortunes fit,
       	   Though the rain it raineth every day.
LEAR
True, my good boy.—Come, bring us to this hovel.
Lear and Kent exit.
FOOL  This is a brave night to cool a courtesan. I’ll
speak a prophecy ere I go:
       	When priests are more in word than matter,
       	When brewers mar their malt with water,
       	When nobles are their tailors’ tutors,
       	No heretics burned but wenches’ suitors,
       	When every case in law is right,
       	No squire in debt, nor no poor knight;
       	When slanders do not live in tongues,
       	Nor cutpurses come not to throngs,
       	When usurers tell their gold i’ th’ field,
       	And bawds and whores do churches build,
       	Then shall the realm of Albion
       	Come to great confusion;
       	Then comes the time, who lives to see ’t,
       	That going shall be used with feet.
This prophecy Merlin shall make, for I live before
his time.
He exits.
 
Scene 3
Enter Gloucester and Edmund.
 
GLOUCESTER  Alack, alack, Edmund, I like not this
unnatural dealing. When I desired their leave that I
might pity him, they took from me the use of mine
own house, charged me on pain of perpetual
displeasure neither to speak of him, entreat for
him, or any way sustain him.
EDMUND  Most savage and unnatural.
GLOUCESTER  Go to; say you nothing. There is division
between the dukes, and a worse matter than that. I
have received a letter this night; ’tis dangerous to
be spoken; I have locked the letter in my closet.
These injuries the King now bears will be revenged
home; there is part of a power already footed. We
must incline to the King. I will look him and privily
relieve him. Go you and maintain talk with the
Duke, that my charity be not of him perceived. If he
ask for me, I am ill and gone to bed. If I die for it, as
no less is threatened me, the King my old master
must be relieved. There is strange things toward,
Edmund. Pray you, be careful. He exits.
EDMUND
This courtesy forbid thee shall the Duke
Instantly know, and of that letter too.
This seems a fair deserving, and must draw me
That which my father loses—no less than all.
The younger rises when the old doth fall.
He exits.
 
Scene 4
Enter Lear, Kent in disguise, and Fool.
 
KENT
Here is the place, my lord. Good my lord, enter.
The tyranny of the open night ’s too rough
For nature to endure. Storm still.
LEAR  Let me alone.
KENT
Good my lord, enter here.
LEAR  Wilt break my heart?
KENT
I had rather break mine own. Good my lord, enter.
LEAR
Thou think’st ’tis much that this contentious storm
Invades us to the skin. So ’tis to thee.
But where the greater malady is fixed,
The lesser is scarce felt. Thou ’dst shun a bear,
But if thy flight lay toward the roaring sea,
Thou ’dst meet the bear i’ th’ mouth. When the
mind’s free,
The body’s delicate. This tempest in my mind
Doth from my senses take all feeling else
Save what beats there. Filial ingratitude!
Is it not as this mouth should tear this hand
For lifting food to ’t? But I will punish home.
No, I will weep no more. In such a night
To shut me out? Pour on. I will endure.
In such a night as this? O Regan, Goneril,
Your old kind father whose frank heart gave all!
O, that way madness lies. Let me shun that;
No more of that.
KENT  Good my lord, enter here.
LEAR
Prithee, go in thyself. Seek thine own ease.
This tempest will not give me leave to ponder
On things would hurt me more. But I’ll go in.—
In, boy; go first.—You houseless poverty—
Nay, get thee in. I’ll pray, and then I’ll sleep.
Fool exits.
Poor naked wretches, wheresoe’er you are,
That bide the pelting of this pitiless storm,
How shall your houseless heads and unfed sides,
Your looped and windowed raggedness defend
you
From seasons such as these? O, I have ta’en
Too little care of this. Take physic, pomp.
Expose thyself to feel what wretches feel,
That thou may’st shake the superflux to them
And show the heavens more just.
EDGAR within  Fathom and half, fathom and half!
Poor Tom!
 
Enter Fool.
 
FOOL  Come not in here, nuncle; here’s a spirit. Help
me, help me!
KENT  Give me thy hand. Who’s there?
FOOL  A spirit, a spirit! He says his name’s Poor Tom.
KENT  What art thou that dost grumble there i’ th’
straw? Come forth.
 
Enter Edgar in disguise.
 
EDGAR  Away. The foul fiend follows me. Through the
sharp hawthorn blows the cold wind. Hum! Go to
thy cold bed and warm thee.
LEAR  Didst thou give all to thy daughters? And art thou
come to this?
EDGAR  Who gives anything to Poor Tom, whom the
foul fiend hath led through fire and through flame,
through ford and whirlpool, o’er bog and quagmire;
that hath laid knives under his pillow and
halters in his pew, set ratsbane by his porridge,
made him proud of heart to ride on a bay trotting
horse over four-inched bridges to course his own
shadow for a traitor? Bless thy five wits! Tom’s
a-cold. O, do de, do de, do de. Bless thee from
whirlwinds, star-blasting, and taking! Do Poor Tom
some charity, whom the foul fiend vexes. There
could I have him now, and there—and there again
—and there. Storm still.
LEAR
Has his daughters brought him to this pass?—
Couldst thou save nothing? Wouldst thou give ’em
all?
FOOL  Nay, he reserved a blanket, else we had been all
shamed.
LEAR
Now all the plagues that in the pendulous air
Hang fated o’er men’s faults light on thy daughters!
KENT  He hath no daughters, sir.
LEAR
Death, traitor! Nothing could have subdued nature
To such a lowness but his unkind daughters.
Is it the fashion that discarded fathers
Should have thus little mercy on their flesh?
Judicious punishment! ’Twas this flesh begot
Those pelican daughters.
EDGAR  Pillicock sat on Pillicock Hill. Alow, alow, loo,
loo.
FOOL  This cold night will turn us all to fools and
madmen.
EDGAR  Take heed o’ th’ foul fiend. Obey thy parents,
keep thy word’s justice, swear not, commit not with
man’s sworn spouse, set not thy sweet heart on
proud array. Tom’s a-cold.
LEAR  What hast thou been?
EDGAR  A servingman, proud in heart and mind, that
curled my hair, wore gloves in my cap, served the
lust of my mistress’ heart and did the act of
darkness with her, swore as many oaths as I spake
words and broke them in the sweet face of heaven;
one that slept in the contriving of lust and waked to
do it. Wine loved I deeply, dice dearly, and in
woman out-paramoured the Turk. False of heart,
light of ear, bloody of hand; hog in sloth, fox in
stealth, wolf in greediness, dog in madness, lion in
prey. Let not the creaking of shoes nor the rustling
of silks betray thy poor heart to woman. Keep thy
foot out of brothels, thy hand out of plackets, thy
pen from lenders’ books, and defy the foul fiend.
Still through the hawthorn blows the cold wind;
says suum, mun, nonny. Dolphin my boy, boy, sessa!
Let him trot by. Storm still.
LEAR  Thou wert better in a grave than to answer with
thy uncovered body this extremity of the skies.—Is
man no more than this? Consider him well.—Thou
ow’st the worm no silk, the beast no hide, the sheep
no wool, the cat no perfume. Ha, here’s three on ’s
are sophisticated. Thou art the thing itself; unaccommodated
man is no more but such a poor, bare,
forked animal as thou art. Off, off, you lendings!
Come, unbutton here. Tearing off his clothes.
FOOL  Prithee, nuncle, be contented. ’Tis a naughty
night to swim in. Now, a little fire in a wild field
were like an old lecher’s heart—a small spark, all
the rest on ’s body cold.
 
Enter Gloucester, with a torch.
 
Look, here comes a walking fire.
EDGAR  This is the foul fiend Flibbertigibbet. He begins
at curfew and walks till the first cock. He
gives the web and the pin, squints the eye, and
makes the harelip, mildews the white wheat, and
hurts the poor creature of earth.
       	Swithold footed thrice the ’old,
       	He met the nightmare and her ninefold,
       	   Bid her alight,
       	   And her troth plight,
       	And aroint thee, witch, aroint thee.
KENT  How fares your Grace?
LEAR  What’s he?
KENT  Who’s there? What is ’t you seek?
GLOUCESTER  What are you there? Your names?
EDGAR  Poor Tom, that eats the swimming frog, the
toad, the tadpole, the wall newt, and the water;
that, in the fury of his heart, when the foul fiend
rages, eats cow dung for sallets, swallows the old
rat and the ditch-dog, drinks the green mantle of
the standing pool; who is whipped from tithing to
tithing, and stocked, punished, and imprisoned;
who hath had three suits to his back, six shirts to
his body,
       	Horse to ride, and weapon to wear;
       	But mice and rats and such small deer
       	Have been Tom’s food for seven long year.
Beware my follower. Peace, Smulkin! Peace, thou
fiend!
GLOUCESTER, to Lear
What, hath your Grace no better company?
EDGAR  The Prince of Darkness is a gentleman. Modo
he’s called, and Mahu.
GLOUCESTER, to Lear
Our flesh and blood, my lord, is grown so vile
That it doth hate what gets it.
EDGAR  Poor Tom’s a-cold.
GLOUCESTER, to Lear
Go in with me. My duty cannot suffer
T’ obey in all your daughters’ hard commands.
Though their injunction be to bar my doors
And let this tyrannous night take hold upon you,
Yet have I ventured to come seek you out
And bring you where both fire and food is ready.
LEAR
First let me talk with this philosopher.
To Edgar. What is the cause of thunder?
KENT
Good my lord, take his offer; go into th’ house.
LEAR
I’ll talk a word with this same learnèd Theban.—
What is your study?
EDGAR  How to prevent the fiend and to kill vermin.
LEAR  Let me ask you one word in private.
They talk aside.
KENT, to Gloucester
Importune him once more to go, my lord.
His wits begin t’ unsettle.
GLOUCESTER  Canst thou blame him?
Storm still.
His daughters seek his death. Ah, that good Kent!
He said it would be thus, poor banished man.
Thou sayest the King grows mad; I’ll tell thee,
friend,
I am almost mad myself. I had a son,
Now outlawed from my blood. He sought my life
But lately, very late. I loved him, friend,
No father his son dearer. True to tell thee,
The grief hath crazed my wits. What a night’s this!
—I do beseech your Grace—
LEAR  O, cry you mercy, sir.
To Edgar. Noble philosopher, your company.
EDGAR  Tom’s a-cold.
GLOUCESTER, to Edgar
In fellow, there, into th’ hovel. Keep thee warm.
LEARCome, let’s in all.
KENT  This way, my lord.
LEAR, indicating Edgar  With him.
I will keep still with my philosopher.
KENT, to Gloucester
Good my lord, soothe him. Let him take the fellow.
GLOUCESTER, to Kent  Take him you on.
KENT, to Edgar
Sirrah, come on: go along with us.
LEAR  Come, good Athenian.
GLOUCESTER  No words, no words. Hush.
EDGAR
       	Child Rowland to the dark tower came.
       	His word was still “Fie, foh, and fum,
       	I smell the blood of a British man.”
They exit.
 
Scene 5
Enter Cornwall, and Edmund with a paper.
 
CORNWALL  I will have my revenge ere I depart his
house.
EDMUND  How, my lord, I may be censured, that nature
thus gives way to loyalty, something fears me to
think of.
CORNWALL  I now perceive it was not altogether your
brother’s evil disposition made him seek his death,
but a provoking merit set awork by a reprovable
badness in himself.
EDMUND  How malicious is my fortune that I must
repent to be just! This is the letter he spoke of,
which approves him an intelligent party to the
advantages of France. O heavens, that this treason
were not, or not I the detector.
CORNWALL  Go with me to the Duchess.
EDMUND  If the matter of this paper be certain, you
have mighty business in hand.
CORNWALL  True or false, it hath made thee Earl of
Gloucester. Seek out where thy father is, that he
may be ready for our apprehension.
EDMUND, aside  If I find him comforting the King, it
will stuff his suspicion more fully.—I will persevere
in my course of loyalty, though the conflict be sore
between that and my blood.
CORNWALL  I will lay trust upon thee, and thou shalt
find a dearer father in my love.
They exit.
 
Scene 6
Enter Kent in disguise, and Gloucester.
 
GLOUCESTER  Here is better than the open air. Take it
thankfully. I will piece out the comfort with what
addition I can. I will not be long from you.
KENT  All the power of his wits have given way to his
impatience. The gods reward your kindness!
Gloucester exits.
 
Enter Lear, Edgar in disguise, and Fool.
 
EDGAR  Frateretto calls me and tells me Nero is an
angler in the lake of darkness. Pray, innocent, and
beware the foul fiend.
FOOL  Prithee, nuncle, tell me whether a madman be a
gentleman or a yeoman.
LEAR  A king, a king!
FOOL  No, he’s a yeoman that has a gentleman to his
son, for he’s a mad yeoman that sees his son a
gentleman before him.
LEAR
To have a thousand with red burning spits
Come hissing in upon ’em!
EDGAR  The foul fiend bites my back.
FOOL  He’s mad that trusts in the tameness of a wolf, a
horse’s health, a boy’s love, or a whore’s oath.
LEAR
It shall be done. I will arraign them straight.
To Edgar. Come, sit thou here, most learnèd
justice.
To Fool. Thou sapient sir, sit here. Now, you
she-foxes—
EDGAR  Look where he stands and glares!—Want’st
thou eyes at trial, madam?
Sings. Come o’er the burn, Bessy, to me—
FOOL sings
       	Her boat hath a leak,
       	And she must not speak
       	Why she dares not come over to thee.
EDGAR  The foul fiend haunts Poor Tom in the voice of
a nightingale. Hoppedance cries in Tom’s belly for
two white herring.—Croak not, black angel. I have
no food for thee.
KENT, to Lear
How do you, sir? Stand you not so amazed.
Will you lie down and rest upon the cushions?
LEAR
I’ll see their trial first. Bring in their evidence.
To Edgar. Thou robèd man of justice, take thy
place,
To Fool. And thou, his yokefellow of equity,
Bench by his side. To Kent. You are o’ th’
commission;
Sit you, too.
EDGAR  Let us deal justly.
Sings. Sleepest or wakest, thou jolly shepherd?
       	   Thy sheep be in the corn.
       	And for one blast of thy minikin mouth,
       	   Thy sheep shall take no harm.
Purr the cat is gray.
LEAR  Arraign her first; ’tis Goneril. I here take my oath
before this honorable assembly, kicked the poor
king her father.
FOOL  Come hither, mistress. Is your name Goneril?
LEAR  She cannot deny it.
FOOL  Cry you mercy, I took you for a joint stool.
LEAR
And here’s another whose warped looks proclaim
What store her heart is made on. Stop her there!
Arms, arms, sword, fire! Corruption in the place!
False justicer, why hast thou let her ’scape?
EDGAR  Bless thy five wits!
KENT, to Lear
O pity! Sir, where is the patience now
That you so oft have boasted to retain?
EDGAR, aside
My tears begin to take his part so much
They mar my counterfeiting.
LEAR  The little dogs and all,
Tray, Blanch, and Sweetheart, see, they bark at me.
EDGAR  Tom will throw his head at them.—Avaunt, you
curs!
       	Be thy mouth or black or white,
       	Tooth that poisons if it bite,
       	Mastiff, greyhound, mongrel grim,
       	Hound or spaniel, brach, or lym,
       	Bobtail tike, or trundle-tail,
       	Tom will make him weep and wail;
       	For, with throwing thus my head,
       	Dogs leapt the hatch, and all are fled.
Do de, de, de. Sessa! Come, march to wakes
and fairs and market towns. Poor Tom, thy horn
is dry.
LEAR  Then let them anatomize Regan; see what breeds
about her heart. Is there any cause in nature that
make these hard hearts? To Edgar. You, sir, I
entertain for one of my hundred; only I do not like
the fashion of your garments. You will say they are
Persian, but let them be changed.
KENT
Now, good my lord, lie here and rest awhile.
LEAR, lying down  Make no noise, make no noise.
Draw the curtains. So, so, we’ll go to supper i’ th’
morning.
FOOL  And I’ll go to bed at noon.
 
Enter Gloucester.
 
GLOUCESTER, to Kent
Come hither, friend. Where is the King my master?
KENT
Here, sir, but trouble him not; his wits are gone.
GLOUCESTER
Good friend, I prithee, take him in thy arms.
I have o’erheard a plot of death upon him.
There is a litter ready; lay him in ’t,
And drive toward Dover, friend, where thou shalt
meet
Both welcome and protection. Take up thy master.
If thou shouldst dally half an hour, his life,
With thine and all that offer to defend him,
Stand in assurèd loss. Take up, take up,
And follow me, that will to some provision
Give thee quick conduct.
KENT  Oppressèd nature sleeps.
This rest might yet have balmed thy broken sinews,
Which, if convenience will not allow,
Stand in hard cure. To the Fool. Come, help to
bear thy master.
Thou must not stay behind.
GLOUCESTER  Come, come away.
All but Edgar exit, carrying Lear.
EDGAR
When we our betters see bearing our woes,
We scarcely think our miseries our foes.
Who alone suffers suffers most i’ th’ mind,
Leaving free things and happy shows behind.
But then the mind much sufferance doth o’erskip
When grief hath mates and bearing fellowship.
How light and portable my pain seems now
When that which makes me bend makes the King
bow!
He childed as I fathered. Tom, away.
Mark the high noises, and thyself bewray
When false opinion, whose wrong thoughts defile
thee,
In thy just proof repeals and reconciles thee.
What will hap more tonight, safe ’scape the King!
Lurk, lurk.
He exits.
 
Scene 7
Enter Cornwall, Regan, Goneril, Edmund, the Bastard,
and Servants.
 
CORNWALL, to Goneril  Post speedily to my lord your
husband. Show him this letter. He gives her a
paper. The army of France is landed.—Seek out
the traitor Gloucester. Some Servants exit.
REGAN  Hang him instantly.
GONERIL  Pluck out his eyes.
CORNWALL  Leave him to my displeasure.—Edmund,
keep you our sister company. The revenges we are
bound to take upon your traitorous father are not
fit for your beholding. Advise the Duke, where you
are going, to a most festinate preparation; we are
bound to the like. Our posts shall be swift and
intelligent betwixt us.—Farewell, dear sister.—
Farewell, my lord of Gloucester.
 
Enter Oswald, the Steward.
 
How now? Where’s the King?
OSWALD
My lord of Gloucester hath conveyed him hence.
Some five- or six-and-thirty of his knights,
Hot questrists after him, met him at gate,
Who, with some other of the lord’s dependents,
Are gone with him toward Dover, where they boast
To have well-armèd friends.
CORNWALL  Get horses for your mistress.
Oswald exits.
GONERIL  Farewell, sweet lord, and sister.
CORNWALL
Edmund, farewell. Goneril and Edmund exit.
Go seek the traitor Gloucester.
Pinion him like a thief; bring him before us.
Some Servants exit.
Though well we may not pass upon his life
Without the form of justice, yet our power
Shall do a court’sy to our wrath, which men
May blame but not control.
 
Enter Gloucester and Servants.
 
Who’s there? The
traitor?
REGAN  Ingrateful fox! ’Tis he.
CORNWALL  Bind fast his corky arms.
GLOUCESTER
What means your Graces? Good my friends,
consider
You are my guests; do me no foul play, friends.
CORNWALL
Bind him, I say.
REGAN  Hard, hard. O filthy traitor!
GLOUCESTER
Unmerciful lady as you are, I’m none.
CORNWALL
To this chair bind him. Servants bind Gloucester.
Villain, thou shalt find—
Regan plucks Gloucester’s beard.
GLOUCESTER
By the kind gods, ’tis most ignobly done
To pluck me by the beard.
REGAN
So white, and such a traitor?
GLOUCESTER  Naughty lady,
These hairs which thou dost ravish from my chin
Will quicken and accuse thee. I am your host;
With robber’s hands my hospitable favors
You should not ruffle thus. What will you do?
CORNWALL
Come, sir, what letters had you late from France?
REGAN
Be simple-answered, for we know the truth.
CORNWALL
And what confederacy have you with the traitors
Late footed in the kingdom?
REGAN  To whose hands
You have sent the lunatic king. Speak.
GLOUCESTER
I have a letter guessingly set down
Which came from one that’s of a neutral heart,
And not from one opposed.
CORNWALL  Cunning.
REGAN  And false.
CORNWALL  Where hast thou sent the King?
GLOUCESTER  To Dover.
REGAN
Wherefore to Dover? Wast thou not charged at
peril—
CORNWALL
Wherefore to Dover? Let him answer that.
GLOUCESTER
I am tied to th’ stake, and I must stand the course.
REGAN  Wherefore to Dover?
GLOUCESTER
Because I would not see thy cruel nails
Pluck out his poor old eyes, nor thy fierce sister
In his anointed flesh stick boarish fangs.
The sea, with such a storm as his bare head
In hell-black night endured, would have buoyed up
And quenched the stellèd fires;
Yet, poor old heart, he holp the heavens to rain.
If wolves had at thy gate howled that stern time,
Thou shouldst have said “Good porter, turn the
key.”
All cruels else subscribe. But I shall see
The wingèd vengeance overtake such children.
CORNWALL
See ’t shalt thou never.—Fellows, hold the chair.—
Upon these eyes of thine I’ll set my foot.
GLOUCESTER
He that will think to live till he be old,
Give me some help!
As Servants hold the chair, Cornwall forces out
one of Gloucester’s eyes.
O cruel! O you gods!
REGAN
One side will mock another. Th’ other too.
CORNWALL
If you see vengeance—
FIRST SERVANT  Hold your hand,
my lord.
I have served you ever since I was a child,
But better service have I never done you
Than now to bid you hold.
REGAN  How now, you dog?
FIRST SERVANT
If you did wear a beard upon your chin,
I’d shake it on this quarrel. What do you mean?
CORNWALL  My villain?  Draw and fight.
FIRST SERVANT
Nay, then, come on, and take the chance of anger.
REGAN, to an Attendant
Give me thy sword. A peasant stand up thus?
She takes a sword and runs
at him behind; kills him.
FIRST SERVANT
O, I am slain! My lord, you have one eye left
To see some mischief on him. O! He dies.
CORNWALL
Lest it see more, prevent it. Out, vile jelly!
Forcing out Gloucester’s other eye.
Where is thy luster now?
GLOUCESTER
All dark and comfortless! Where’s my son
Edmund?—
Edmund, enkindle all the sparks of nature
To quit this horrid act.
REGAN  Out, treacherous villain!
Thou call’st on him that hates thee. It was he
That made the overture of thy treasons to us,
Who is too good to pity thee.
GLOUCESTER
O my follies! Then Edgar was abused.
Kind gods, forgive me that, and prosper him.
REGAN
Go thrust him out at gates, and let him smell
His way to Dover.
Some Servants exit with Gloucester.
How is ’t, my lord? How look you?
CORNWALL
I have received a hurt. Follow me, lady.—
Turn out that eyeless villain. Throw this slave
Upon the dunghill.—Regan, I bleed apace.
Untimely comes this hurt. Give me your arm.
Cornwall and Regan exit.
SECOND SERVANT
I’ll never care what wickedness I do
If this man come to good.
THIRD SERVANT  If she live long
And in the end meet the old course of death,
Women will all turn monsters.
SECOND SERVANT
Let’s follow the old earl and get the Bedlam
To lead him where he would. His roguish madness
Allows itself to anything.
THIRD SERVANT
Go thou. I’ll fetch some flax and whites of eggs
To apply to his bleeding face. Now heaven help him!
They exit.
 
 
 

 
 
ACT 4
 
Scene 1
Enter Edgar in disguise.
 
EDGAR
Yet better thus, and known to be contemned,
Than still contemned and flattered. To be worst,
The lowest and most dejected thing of Fortune,
Stands still in esperance, lives not in fear.
The lamentable change is from the best;
The worst returns to laughter. Welcome, then,
Thou unsubstantial air that I embrace.
The wretch that thou hast blown unto the worst
Owes nothing to thy blasts. But who comes here?
 
Enter Gloucester and an old man.
 
My father, poorly led? World, world, O world,
But that thy strange mutations make us hate thee,
Life would not yield to age.
OLD MAN
O my good lord, I have been your tenant
And your father’s tenant these fourscore years.
GLOUCESTER
Away, get thee away. Good friend, begone.
Thy comforts can do me no good at all;
Thee they may hurt.
OLD MAN  You cannot see your way.
GLOUCESTER
I have no way and therefore want no eyes.
I stumbled when I saw. Full oft ’tis seen
Our means secure us, and our mere defects
Prove our commodities. O dear son Edgar,
The food of thy abusèd father’s wrath,
Might I but live to see thee in my touch,
I’d say I had eyes again.
OLD MAN  How now? Who’s there?
EDGAR, aside
O gods, who is ’t can say “I am at the worst”?
I am worse than e’er I was.
OLD MAN  ’Tis poor mad Tom.
EDGAR, aside
And worse I may be yet. The worst is not
So long as we can say “This is the worst.”
OLD MAN
Fellow, where goest?
GLOUCESTER  Is it a beggar-man?
OLD MAN  Madman and beggar too.
GLOUCESTER
He has some reason, else he could not beg.
I’ th’ last night’s storm, I such a fellow saw,
Which made me think a man a worm. My son
Came then into my mind, and yet my mind
Was then scarce friends with him. I have heard
more since.
As flies to wanton boys are we to th’ gods;
They kill us for their sport.
EDGAR, aside  How should this be?
Bad is the trade that must play fool to sorrow,
Ang’ring itself and others.—Bless thee, master.
GLOUCESTER
Is that the naked fellow?
OLD MAN  Ay, my lord.
GLOUCESTER
Then, prithee, get thee away. If for my sake
Thou wilt o’ertake us hence a mile or twain
I’ th’ way toward Dover, do it for ancient love,
And bring some covering for this naked soul,
Which I’ll entreat to lead me.
OLD MAN  Alack, sir, he is mad.
GLOUCESTER
’Tis the time’s plague when madmen lead the blind.
Do as I bid thee, or rather do thy pleasure.
Above the rest, begone.
OLD MAN
I’ll bring him the best ’parel that I have,
Come on ’t what will. He exits.
GLOUCESTER  Sirrah, naked fellow—
EDGAR
Poor Tom’s a-cold. Aside. I cannot daub it further.
GLOUCESTER  Come hither, fellow.
EDGAR, aside
And yet I must.—Bless thy sweet eyes, they bleed.
GLOUCESTER  Know’st thou the way to Dover?
EDGAR  Both stile and gate, horseway and footpath.
Poor Tom hath been scared out of his good wits.
Bless thee, good man’s son, from the foul fiend.
Five fiends have been in Poor Tom at once: of lust,
as Obidicut; Hobbididance, prince of dumbness;
Mahu, of stealing; Modo, of murder; Flibbertigibbet,
of mopping and mowing, who since possesses
chambermaids and waiting women. So, bless
thee, master.
GLOUCESTER, giving him money
Here, take this purse, thou whom the heavens’
plagues
Have humbled to all strokes. That I am wretched
Makes thee the happier. Heavens, deal so still:
Let the superfluous and lust-dieted man,
That slaves your ordinance, that will not see
Because he does not feel, feel your power quickly.
So distribution should undo excess
And each man have enough. Dost thou know Dover?
EDGAR  Ay, master.
GLOUCESTER
There is a cliff, whose high and bending head
Looks fearfully in the confinèd deep.
Bring me but to the very brim of it,
And I’ll repair the misery thou dost bear
With something rich about me. From that place
I shall no leading need.
EDGAR  Give me thy arm.
Poor Tom shall lead thee.
They exit.
 
Scene 2
Enter Goneril and Edmund, the Bastard.
 
GONERIL
Welcome, my lord. I marvel our mild husband
Not met us on the way.
 
Enter Oswald, the Steward.
 
Now, where’s your master?
OSWALD
Madam, within, but never man so changed.
I told him of the army that was landed;
He smiled at it. I told him you were coming;
His answer was “The worse.” Of Gloucester’s
treachery
And of the loyal service of his son
When I informed him, then he called me “sot”
And told me I had turned the wrong side out.
What most he should dislike seems pleasant to him;
What like, offensive.
GONERIL, to Edmund  Then shall you go no further.
It is the cowish terror of his spirit,
That dares not undertake. He’ll not feel wrongs
Which tie him to an answer. Our wishes on the way
May prove effects. Back, Edmund, to my brother.
Hasten his musters and conduct his powers.
I must change names at home and give the distaff
Into my husband’s hands. This trusty servant
Shall pass between us. Ere long you are like to
hear—
If you dare venture in your own behalf—
A mistress’s command. Wear this; spare speech.
She gives him a favor.
Decline your head. She kisses him. This kiss, if it
durst speak,
Would stretch thy spirits up into the air.
Conceive, and fare thee well.
EDMUND
Yours in the ranks of death. He exits.
GONERIL  My most dear
Gloucester!
O, the difference of man and man!
To thee a woman’s services are due;
My fool usurps my body.
OSWALD  Madam, here comes my lord. He exits.
 
Enter Albany.
 
GONERIL
I have been worth the whistle.
ALBANY  O Goneril,
You are not worth the dust which the rude wind
Blows in your face. I fear your disposition.
That nature which contemns its origin
Cannot be bordered certain in itself.
She that herself will sliver and disbranch
From her material sap perforce must wither
And come to deadly use.
GONERIL  No more. The text is foolish.
ALBANY
Wisdom and goodness to the vile seem vile.
Filths savor but themselves. What have you done?
Tigers, not daughters, what have you performed?
A father, and a gracious agèd man,
Whose reverence even the head-lugged bear would
lick,
Most barbarous, most degenerate, have you
madded.
Could my good brother suffer you to do it?
A man, a prince, by him so benefited!
If that the heavens do not their visible spirits
Send quickly down to tame these vile offenses,
It will come:
Humanity must perforce prey on itself,
Like monsters of the deep.
GONERIL  Milk-livered man,
That bear’st a cheek for blows, a head for wrongs;
Who hast not in thy brows an eye discerning
Thine honor from thy suffering; that not know’st
Fools do those villains pity who are punished
Ere they have done their mischief. Where’s thy
drum?
France spreads his banners in our noiseless land,
With plumèd helm thy state begins to threat,
Whilst thou, a moral fool, sits still and cries
“Alack, why does he so?”
ALBANY  See thyself, devil!
Proper deformity shows not in the fiend
So horrid as in woman.
GONERIL  O vain fool!
ALBANY
Thou changèd and self-covered thing, for shame
Bemonster not thy feature. Were ’t my fitness
To let these hands obey my blood,
They are apt enough to dislocate and tear
Thy flesh and bones. Howe’er thou art a fiend,
A woman’s shape doth shield thee.
GONERIL  Marry, your manhood, mew—
 
Enter a Messenger.
 
ALBANY  What news?
MESSENGER
O, my good lord, the Duke of Cornwall’s dead,
Slain by his servant, going to put out
The other eye of Gloucester.
ALBANY  Gloucester’s eyes?
MESSENGER
A servant that he bred, thrilled with remorse,
Opposed against the act, bending his sword
To his great master, who, thereat enraged,
Flew on him and amongst them felled him dead,
But not without that harmful stroke which since
Hath plucked him after.
ALBANY  This shows you are above,
You justicers, that these our nether crimes
So speedily can venge. But, O poor Gloucester,
Lost he his other eye?
MESSENGER  Both, both, my lord.—
This letter, madam, craves a speedy answer.
Giving her a paper.
’Tis from your sister.
GONERIL, aside  One way I like this well.
But being widow and my Gloucester with her
May all the building in my fancy pluck
Upon my hateful life. Another way
The news is not so tart.—I’ll read, and answer.
She exits.
ALBANY
Where was his son when they did take his eyes?
MESSENGER
Come with my lady hither.
ALBANY  He is not here.
MESSENGER
No, my good lord. I met him back again.
ALBANY  Knows he the wickedness?
MESSENGER
Ay, my good lord. ’Twas he informed against him
And quit the house on purpose, that their punishment
Might have the freer course.
ALBANY  Gloucester, I live
To thank thee for the love thou show’d’st the King,
And to revenge thine eyes.—Come hither, friend.
Tell me what more thou know’st.
They exit.
 
Scene 3
Enter Kent in disguise and a Gentleman.
 
KENT  Why the King of France is so suddenly gone
back know you no reason?
GENTLEMAN  Something he left imperfect in the state,
which since his coming forth is thought of, which
imports to the kingdom so much fear and danger
that his personal return was most required and
necessary.
KENT  Who hath he left behind him general?
GENTLEMAN  The Marshal of France, Monsieur La Far.
KENT  Did your letters pierce the Queen to any demonstration
of grief?
GENTLEMAN
Ay, sir, she took them, read them in my
presence,
And now and then an ample tear trilled down
Her delicate cheek. It seemed she was a queen
Over her passion, who, most rebel-like,
Fought to be king o’er her.
KENT  O, then it moved her.
GENTLEMAN
Not to a rage. Patience and sorrow strove
Who should express her goodliest. You have seen
Sunshine and rain at once; her smiles and tears
Were like a better way. Those happy smilets
That played on her ripe lip seemed not to know
What guests were in her eyes, which parted thence
As pearls from diamonds dropped. In brief,
Sorrow would be a rarity most beloved
If all could so become it.
KENT  Made she no verbal question?
GENTLEMAN
Faith, once or twice she heaved the name of
“father”
Pantingly forth, as if it pressed her heart;
Cried “Sisters, sisters, shame of ladies, sisters!
Kent, father, sisters! What, i’ th’ storm, i’ th’ night?
Let pity not be believed!” There she shook
The holy water from her heavenly eyes,
And clamor moistened. Then away she started,
To deal with grief alone.
KENT  It is the stars.
The stars above us govern our conditions,
Else one self mate and make could not beget
Such different issues. You spoke not with her
since?
GENTLEMAN  No.
KENT
Was this before the King returned?
GENTLEMAN  No, since.
KENT
Well, sir, the poor distressèd Lear’s i’ th’ town,
Who sometime in his better tune remembers
What we are come about, and by no means
Will yield to see his daughter.
GENTLEMAN  Why, good sir?
KENT
A sovereign shame so elbows him—his own
unkindness,
That stripped her from his benediction, turned her
To foreign casualties, gave her dear rights
To his dog-hearted daughters—these things sting
His mind so venomously that burning shame
Detains him from Cordelia.
GENTLEMAN  Alack, poor gentleman!
KENT
Of Albany’s and Cornwall’s powers you heard not?
GENTLEMAN  ’Tis so. They are afoot.
KENT
Well, sir, I’ll bring you to our master Lear
And leave you to attend him. Some dear cause
Will in concealment wrap me up awhile.
When I am known aright, you shall not grieve
Lending me this acquaintance. I pray you, go
Along with me.
They exit.
 
Scene 4
Enter with Drum and Colors, Cordelia, Doctor,
Gentlemen, and Soldiers.
 
CORDELIA
Alack, ’tis he! Why, he was met even now
As mad as the vexed sea, singing aloud,
Crowned with rank fumiter and furrow-weeds,
With hardocks, hemlock, nettles, cuckooflowers,
Darnel, and all the idle weeds that grow
In our sustaining corn. A century send forth.
Search every acre in the high-grown field
And bring him to our eye.  Soldiers exit.
What can man’s wisdom
In the restoring his bereavèd sense?
He that helps him take all my outward worth.
DOCTOR  There is means, madam.
Our foster nurse of nature is repose,
The which he lacks. That to provoke in him
Are many simples operative, whose power
Will close the eye of anguish.
CORDELIA  All blest secrets,
All you unpublished virtues of the earth,
Spring with my tears. Be aidant and remediate
In the good man’s distress. Seek, seek for him,
Lest his ungoverned rage dissolve the life
That wants the means to lead it.
 
Enter Messenger.
 
MESSENGER  News, madam.
The British powers are marching hitherward.
CORDELIA
’Tis known before. Our preparation stands
In expectation of them.—O dear father,
It is thy business that I go about.
Therefore great France
My mourning and importuned tears hath pitied.
No blown ambition doth our arms incite,
But love, dear love, and our aged father’s right.
Soon may I hear and see him.
They exit.
 
Scene 5
Enter Regan and Oswald, the Steward.
 
REGAN
But are my brother’s powers set forth?
OSWALD  Ay, madam.
REGAN  Himself in person there?
OSWALD  Madam, with much ado.
Your sister is the better soldier.
REGAN
Lord Edmund spake not with your lord at home?
OSWALD  No, madam.
REGAN
What might import my sister’s letter to him?
OSWALD  I know not, lady.
REGAN
Faith, he is posted hence on serious matter.
It was great ignorance, Gloucester’s eyes being out,
To let him live. Where he arrives he moves
All hearts against us. Edmund, I think, is gone,
In pity of his misery, to dispatch
His nighted life; moreover to descry
The strength o’ th’ enemy.
OSWALD
I must needs after him, madam, with my letter.
REGAN
Our troops set forth tomorrow. Stay with us.
The ways are dangerous.
OSWALD  I may not, madam.
My lady charged my duty in this business.
REGAN
Why should she write to Edmund? Might not you
Transport her purposes by word? Belike,
Some things—I know not what. I’ll love thee much—
Let me unseal the letter.
OSWALD  Madam, I had rather—
REGAN
I know your lady does not love her husband;
I am sure of that; and at her late being here,
She gave strange eliads and most speaking looks
To noble Edmund. I know you are of her bosom.
OSWALD  I, madam?
REGAN
I speak in understanding. Y’ are; I know ’t.
Therefore I do advise you take this note:
My lord is dead; Edmund and I have talked,
And more convenient is he for my hand
Than for your lady’s. You may gather more.
If you do find him, pray you, give him this,
And when your mistress hears thus much from you,
I pray, desire her call her wisdom to her.
So, fare you well.
If you do chance to hear of that blind traitor,
Preferment falls on him that cuts him off.
OSWALD
Would I could meet him, madam. I should show
What party I do follow.
REGAN  Fare thee well.
They exit.
 
Scene 6
Enter Gloucester and Edgar dressed as a peasant.
 
GLOUCESTER
When shall I come to th’ top of that same hill?
EDGAR
You do climb up it now. Look how we labor.
GLOUCESTER
Methinks the ground is even.
EDGAR  Horrible steep.
Hark, do you hear the sea?
GLOUCESTER  No, truly.
EDGAR
Why then, your other senses grow imperfect
By your eyes’ anguish.
GLOUCESTER  So may it be indeed.
Methinks thy voice is altered and thou speak’st
In better phrase and matter than thou didst.
EDGAR
You’re much deceived; in nothing am I changed
But in my garments.
GLOUCESTER  Methinks you’re better spoken.
EDGAR
Come on, sir. Here’s the place. Stand still. How
fearful
And dizzy ’tis to cast one’s eyes so low!
The crows and choughs that wing the midway air
Show scarce so gross as beetles. Halfway down
Hangs one that gathers samphire—dreadful trade;
Methinks he seems no bigger than his head.
The fishermen that walk upon the beach
Appear like mice, and yond tall anchoring bark
Diminished to her cock, her cock a buoy
Almost too small for sight. The murmuring surge
That on th’ unnumbered idle pebble chafes
Cannot be heard so high. I’ll look no more
Lest my brain turn and the deficient sight
Topple down headlong.
GLOUCESTER  Set me where you stand.
EDGAR
Give me your hand. You are now within a foot
Of th’ extreme verge. For all beneath the moon
Would I not leap upright.
GLOUCESTER  Let go my hand.
Here, friend, ’s another purse; in it a jewel
Well worth a poor man’s taking. Fairies and gods
Prosper it with thee. He gives Edgar a purse.
Go thou further off.
Bid me farewell, and let me hear thee going.
EDGAR, walking away
Now fare you well, good sir.
GLOUCESTER  With all my heart.
EDGAR, aside
Why I do trifle thus with his despair
Is done to cure it.
GLOUCESTER  O you mighty gods! He kneels.
This world I do renounce, and in your sights
Shake patiently my great affliction off.
If I could bear it longer, and not fall
To quarrel with your great opposeless wills,
My snuff and loathèd part of nature should
Burn itself out. If Edgar live, O, bless him!—
Now, fellow, fare thee well. He falls.
EDGAR  Gone, sir. Farewell.—
And yet I know not how conceit may rob
The treasury of life, when life itself
Yields to the theft. Had he been where he thought,
By this had thought been past. Alive or dead?—
Ho you, sir! Friend, hear you. Sir, speak.—
Thus might he pass indeed. Yet he revives.—
What are you, sir?
GLOUCESTER  Away, and let me die.
EDGAR
Hadst thou been aught but gossamer, feathers, air,
So many fathom down precipitating,
Thou ’dst shivered like an egg; but thou dost
breathe,
Hast heavy substance, bleed’st not, speak’st, art
sound.
Ten masts at each make not the altitude
Which thou hast perpendicularly fell.
Thy life’s a miracle. Speak yet again.
GLOUCESTER  But have I fall’n or no?
EDGAR
From the dread summit of this chalky bourn.
Look up a-height. The shrill-gorged lark so far
Cannot be seen or heard. Do but look up.
GLOUCESTER  Alack, I have no eyes.
Is wretchedness deprived that benefit
To end itself by death? ’Twas yet some comfort
When misery could beguile the tyrant’s rage
And frustrate his proud will.
EDGAR  Give me your arm.
He raises Gloucester.
Up. So, how is ’t? Feel you your legs? You stand.
GLOUCESTER
Too well, too well.
EDGAR  This is above all strangeness.
Upon the crown o’ th’ cliff, what thing was that
Which parted from you?
GLOUCESTER  A poor unfortunate beggar.
EDGAR
As I stood here below, methought his eyes
Were two full moons; he had a thousand noses,
Horns whelked and waved like the enragèd sea.
It was some fiend. Therefore, thou happy father,
Think that the clearest gods, who make them
honors
Of men’s impossibilities, have preserved thee.
GLOUCESTER
I do remember now. Henceforth I’ll bear
Affliction till it do cry out itself
“Enough, enough!” and die. That thing you speak of,
I took it for a man. Often ’twould say
“The fiend, the fiend!” He led me to that place.
EDGAR
Bear free and patient thoughts.
 
Enter Lear.
 
But who comes here?
The safer sense will ne’er accommodate
His master thus.
LEAR  No, they cannot touch me for coining. I am the
King himself.
EDGAR  O, thou side-piercing sight!
LEAR  Nature’s above art in that respect. There’s your
press-money. That fellow handles his bow like a
crowkeeper. Draw me a clothier’s yard. Look, look,
a mouse! Peace, peace! This piece of toasted cheese
will do ’t. There’s my gauntlet; I’ll prove it on a
giant. Bring up the brown bills. O, well flown, bird!
I’ th’ clout, i’ th’ clout! Hewgh! Give the word.
EDGAR  Sweet marjoram.
LEAR  Pass.
GLOUCESTER  I know that voice.
LEAR  Ha! Goneril with a white beard? They flattered
me like a dog and told me I had the white hairs in
my beard ere the black ones were there. To say “ay”
and “no” to everything that I said “ay” and “no” to
was no good divinity. When the rain came to wet me
once and the wind to make me chatter, when the
thunder would not peace at my bidding, there I
found ’em, there I smelt ’em out. Go to. They are
not men o’ their words; they told me I was everything.
’Tis a lie. I am not ague-proof.
GLOUCESTER
The trick of that voice I do well remember.
Is ’t not the King?
LEAR  Ay, every inch a king.
When I do stare, see how the subject quakes.
I pardon that man’s life. What was thy cause?
Adultery? Thou shalt not die. Die for adultery? No.
The wren goes to ’t, and the small gilded fly does
lecher in my sight. Let copulation thrive, for
Gloucester’s bastard son was kinder to his father
than my daughters got ’tween the lawful sheets. To
’t, luxury, pell-mell, for I lack soldiers. Behold yond
simp’ring dame, whose face between her forks
presages snow, that minces virtue and does shake
the head to hear of pleasure’s name. The fitchew
nor the soiled horse goes to ’t with a more riotous
appetite. Down from the waist they are centaurs,
though women all above. But to the girdle do the
gods inherit; beneath is all the fiend’s. There’s hell,
there’s darkness, there is the sulphurous pit; burning,
scalding, stench, consumption! Fie, fie, fie, pah,
pah! Give me an ounce of civet, good apothecary;
sweeten my imagination. There’s money for thee.
GLOUCESTER  O, let me kiss that hand!
LEAR  Let me wipe it first; it smells of mortality.
GLOUCESTER
O ruined piece of nature! This great world
Shall so wear out to naught. Dost thou know me?
LEAR  I remember thine eyes well enough. Dost thou
squinny at me? No, do thy worst, blind Cupid, I’ll
not love. Read thou this challenge. Mark but the
penning of it.
GLOUCESTER
Were all thy letters suns, I could not see.
EDGAR, aside
I would not take this from report. It is,
And my heart breaks at it.
LEAR  Read.
GLOUCESTER  What, with the case of eyes?
LEAR  O ho, are you there with me? No eyes in your
head, nor no money in your purse? Your eyes are in
a heavy case, your purse in a light, yet you see how
this world goes.
GLOUCESTER  I see it feelingly.
LEAR  What, art mad? A man may see how this world
goes with no eyes. Look with thine ears. See how
yond justice rails upon yond simple thief. Hark in
thine ear. Change places and, handy-dandy, which
is the justice, which is the thief? Thou hast seen a
farmer’s dog bark at a beggar?
GLOUCESTER  Ay, sir.
LEAR  And the creature run from the cur? There thou
might’st behold the great image of authority: a
dog’s obeyed in office.
Thou rascal beadle, hold thy bloody hand!
Why dost thou lash that whore? Strip thy own back.
Thou hotly lusts to use her in that kind
For which thou whipp’st her. The usurer hangs the
cozener.
Through tattered clothes small vices do appear.
Robes and furred gowns hide all. Plate sin with
gold,
And the strong lance of justice hurtless breaks.
Arm it in rags, a pygmy’s straw does pierce it.
None does offend, none, I say, none; I’ll able ’em.
Take that of me, my friend, who have the power
To seal th’ accuser’s lips. Get thee glass eyes,
And like a scurvy politician
Seem to see the things thou dost not. Now, now,
now, now.
Pull off my boots. Harder, harder. So.
EDGAR, aside
O, matter and impertinency mixed,
Reason in madness!
LEAR
If thou wilt weep my fortunes, take my eyes.
I know thee well enough; thy name is Gloucester.
Thou must be patient. We came crying hither;
Thou know’st the first time that we smell the air
We wawl and cry. I will preach to thee. Mark.
GLOUCESTER  Alack, alack the day!
LEAR
When we are born, we cry that we are come
To this great stage of fools.—This’ a good block.
It were a delicate stratagem to shoe
A troop of horse with felt. I’ll put ’t in proof,
And when I have stol’n upon these son-in-laws,
Then kill, kill, kill, kill, kill, kill!
 
Enter a Gentleman and Attendants.
 
GENTLEMAN, noticing Lear
O, here he is. To an Attendant. Lay hand upon
him.—Sir,
Your most dear daughter—
LEAR
No rescue? What, a prisoner? I am even
The natural fool of Fortune. Use me well.
You shall have ransom. Let me have surgeons;
I am cut to th’ brains.
GENTLEMAN  You shall have anything.
LEAR  No seconds? All myself?
Why, this would make a man a man of salt,
To use his eyes for garden waterpots,
Ay, and laying autumn’s dust.
I will die bravely like a smug bridegroom. What?
I will be jovial. Come, come, I am a king,
Masters, know you that?
GENTLEMAN
You are a royal one, and we obey you.
LEAR  Then there’s life in ’t. Come, an you get it, you
shall get it by running. Sa, sa, sa, sa.
The King exits running pursued by Attendants.
GENTLEMAN
A sight most pitiful in the meanest wretch,
Past speaking of in a king. Thou hast a daughter
Who redeems nature from the general curse
Which twain have brought her to.
EDGAR  Hail, gentle sir.
GENTLEMAN  Sir, speed you. What’s your will?
EDGAR
Do you hear aught, sir, of a battle toward?
GENTLEMAN
Most sure and vulgar. Everyone hears that,
Which can distinguish sound.
EDGAR  But, by your favor,
How near’s the other army?
GENTLEMAN
Near and on speedy foot. The main descry
Stands on the hourly thought.
EDGAR  I thank you, sir. That’s all.
GENTLEMAN
Though that the Queen on special cause is here,
Her army is moved on.
EDGAR  I thank you, sir.
Gentleman exits.
GLOUCESTER
You ever-gentle gods, take my breath from me;
Let not my worser spirit tempt me again
To die before you please.
EDGAR  Well pray you, father.
GLOUCESTER  Now, good sir, what are you?
EDGAR
A most poor man, made tame to Fortune’s blows,
Who, by the art of known and feeling sorrows,
Am pregnant to good pity. Give me your hand;
I’ll lead you to some biding.
He takes Gloucester’s hand.
GLOUCESTER  Hearty thanks.
The bounty and the benison of heaven
To boot, and boot.
 
Enter Oswald, the Steward.
 
OSWALD, drawing his sword
A proclaimed prize! Most happy!
That eyeless head of thine was first framed flesh
To raise my fortunes. Thou old unhappy traitor,
Briefly thyself remember; the sword is out
That must destroy thee.
GLOUCESTER  Now let thy friendly hand
Put strength enough to ’t.
Edgar steps between Gloucester and Oswald.
OSWALD  Wherefore, bold peasant,
Dar’st thou support a published traitor? Hence,
Lest that th’ infection of his fortune take
Like hold on thee. Let go his arm.
EDGAR  Chill not let go, zir, without vurther ’casion.
OSWALD  Let go, slave, or thou diest!
EDGAR  Good gentleman, go your gait, and let poor
volk pass. An ’chud ha’ bin zwaggered out of my
life, ’twould not ha’ bin zo long as ’tis by a vortnight.
Nay, come not near th’ old man. Keep out,
che vor’ ye, or Ise try whether your costard or my
ballow be the harder. Chill be plain with you.
OSWALD  Out, dunghill.
EDGAR  Chill pick your teeth, zir. Come, no matter vor
your foins. They fight.
OSWALD, falling
Slave, thou hast slain me. Villain, take my purse.
If ever thou wilt thrive, bury my body,
And give the letters which thou find’st about me
To Edmund, Earl of Gloucester. Seek him out
Upon the English party. O, untimely death! Death!
He dies.
EDGAR
I know thee well, a serviceable villain,
As duteous to the vices of thy mistress
As badness would desire.
GLOUCESTER  What, is he dead?
EDGAR  Sit you down, father; rest you.
Let’s see these pockets. The letters that he speaks of
May be my friends. He’s dead; I am only sorry
He had no other deathsman. Let us see.
He opens a letter.
Leave, gentle wax, and, manners, blame us not.
To know our enemies’ minds, we rip their hearts.
Their papers is more lawful. Reads the letter.
Let our reciprocal vows be remembered. You have
many opportunities to cut him off. If your will want
not, time and place will be fruitfully offered. There is
nothing done if he return the conqueror. Then am I
the prisoner, and his bed my jail, from the loathed
warmth whereof deliver me and supply the place for
your labor.
Your (wife, so I would say) affectionate servant,
and, for you, her own for venture, Goneril.
O indistinguished space of woman’s will!
A plot upon her virtuous husband’s life,
And the exchange my brother.—Here, in the sands
Thee I’ll rake up, the post unsanctified
Of murderous lechers; and in the mature time
With this ungracious paper strike the sight
Of the death-practiced duke. For him ’tis well
That of thy death and business I can tell.
GLOUCESTER
The King is mad. How stiff is my vile sense
That I stand up and have ingenious feeling
Of my huge sorrows! Better I were distract.
So should my thoughts be severed from my griefs,
And woes, by wrong imaginations, lose
The knowledge of themselves. Drum afar off.
EDGAR  Give me your hand.
Far off methinks I hear the beaten drum.
Come, father, I’ll bestow you with a friend.
They exit.
 
Scene 7
Enter Cordelia, Kent in disguise, Doctor, and
Gentleman.
 
CORDELIA
O, thou good Kent, how shall I live and work
To match thy goodness? My life will be too short,
And every measure fail me.
KENT
To be acknowledged, madam, is o’erpaid.
All my reports go with the modest truth,
Nor more, nor clipped, but so.
CORDELIA  Be better suited.
These weeds are memories of those worser hours.
I prithee put them off.
KENT  Pardon, dear madam.
Yet to be known shortens my made intent.
My boon I make it that you know me not
Till time and I think meet.
CORDELIA
Then be ’t so, my good lord.—How does the King?
DOCTOR  Madam, sleeps still.
CORDELIA  O, you kind gods,
Cure this great breach in his abusèd nature!
Th’ untuned and jarring senses, O, wind up,
Of this child-changèd father!
DOCTOR  So please your Majesty
That we may wake the King? He hath slept
long.
CORDELIA
Be governed by your knowledge, and proceed
I’ th’ sway of your own will. Is he arrayed?
 
Enter Lear in a chair carried by Servants.
 
GENTLEMAN
Ay, madam. In the heaviness of sleep,
We put fresh garments on him.
DOCTOR
Be by, good madam, when we do awake him.
I doubt not of his temperance.
CORDELIA  Very well.
Music.
DOCTOR
Please you, draw near.—Louder the music there.
CORDELIA, kissing Lear
O, my dear father, restoration hang
Thy medicine on my lips, and let this kiss
Repair those violent harms that my two sisters
Have in thy reverence made.
KENT  Kind and dear princess.
CORDELIA
Had you not been their father, these white flakes
Did challenge pity of them. Was this a face
To be opposed against the jarring winds?
To stand against the deep dread-bolted thunder,
In the most terrible and nimble stroke
Of quick cross-lightning? To watch, poor perdu,
With this thin helm? Mine enemy’s dog,
Though he had bit me, should have stood that night
Against my fire. And wast thou fain, poor father,
To hovel thee with swine and rogues forlorn
In short and musty straw? Alack, alack,
’Tis wonder that thy life and wits at once
Had not concluded all.—He wakes. Speak to him.
DOCTOR  Madam, do you; ’tis fittest.
CORDELIA
How does my royal lord? How fares your Majesty?
LEAR
You do me wrong to take me out o’ th’ grave.
Thou art a soul in bliss, but I am bound
Upon a wheel of fire, that mine own tears
Do scald like molten lead.
CORDELIA  Sir, do you know me?
LEAR
You are a spirit, I know. Where did you die?
CORDELIA  Still, still, far wide.
DOCTOR
He’s scarce awake. Let him alone awhile.
LEAR
Where have I been? Where am I? Fair daylight?
I am mightily abused; I should e’en die with pity
To see another thus. I know not what to say.
I will not swear these are my hands. Let’s see.
I feel this pinprick. Would I were assured
Of my condition!
CORDELIA  O, look upon me, sir,
And hold your hand in benediction o’er me.
No, sir, you must not kneel.
LEAR  Pray do not mock:
I am a very foolish fond old man,
Fourscore and upward, not an hour more nor less,
And to deal plainly,
I fear I am not in my perfect mind.
Methinks I should know you and know this man,
Yet I am doubtful, for I am mainly ignorant
What place this is, and all the skill I have
Remembers not these garments; nor I know not
Where I did lodge last night. Do not laugh at me,
For, as I am a man, I think this lady
To be my child Cordelia.
CORDELIA, weeping  And so I am; I am.
LEAR
Be your tears wet? Yes, faith. I pray, weep not.
If you have poison for me, I will drink it.
I know you do not love me, for your sisters
Have, as I do remember, done me wrong.
You have some cause; they have not.
CORDELIA  No cause, no
cause.
LEAR  Am I in France?
KENT  In your own kingdom, sir.
LEAR  Do not abuse me.
DOCTOR
Be comforted, good madam. The great rage,
You see, is killed in him, and yet it is danger
To make him even o’er the time he has lost.
Desire him to go in. Trouble him no more
Till further settling.
CORDELIA  Will ’t please your Highness walk?
LEAR  You must bear with me.
Pray you now, forget, and forgive. I am old and
foolish.                             	They exit. Kent and Gentleman remain.
GENTLEMAN  Holds it true, sir, that the Duke of Cornwall
was so slain?
KENT  Most certain, sir.
GENTLEMAN  Who is conductor of his people?
KENT  As ’tis said, the bastard son of Gloucester.
GENTLEMAN  They say Edgar, his banished son, is with
the Earl of Kent in Germany.
KENT  Report is changeable. ’Tis time to look about.
The powers of the kingdom approach apace.
GENTLEMAN  The arbitrament is like to be bloody. Fare
you well, sir. He exits.
KENT
My point and period will be throughly wrought,
Or well, or ill, as this day’s battle’s fought.
He exits.
 
 
 

 
 
ACT 5
 
Scene 1
Enter, with Drum and Colors, Edmund, Regan,
Gentlemen, and Soldiers.
 
EDMUND, to a Gentleman
Know of the Duke if his last purpose hold,
Or whether since he is advised by aught
To change the course. He’s full of alteration
And self-reproving. Bring his constant pleasure.
A Gentleman exits.
REGAN
Our sister’s man is certainly miscarried.
EDMUND
’Tis to be doubted, madam.
REGAN  Now, sweet lord,
You know the goodness I intend upon you;
Tell me but truly, but then speak the truth,
Do you not love my sister?
EDMUND  In honored love.
REGAN
But have you never found my brother’s way
To the forfended place?
EDMUND  That thought abuses you.
REGAN
I am doubtful that you have been conjunct
And bosomed with her as far as we call hers.
EDMUND  No, by mine honor, madam.
REGAN
I never shall endure her. Dear my lord,
Be not familiar with her.
EDMUND
Fear me not. She and the Duke, her husband.
 
Enter, with Drum and Colors, Albany, Goneril, Soldiers.
 
GONERIL, aside
I had rather lose the battle than that sister
Should loosen him and me.
ALBANY
Our very loving sister, well bemet.—
Sir, this I heard: the King is come to his daughter,
With others whom the rigor of our state
Forced to cry out. Where I could not be honest,
I never yet was valiant. For this business,
It touches us as France invades our land,
Not bolds the King, with others whom, I fear,
Most just and heavy causes make oppose.
EDMUND
Sir, you speak nobly.
REGAN  Why is this reasoned?
GONERIL
Combine together ’gainst the enemy,
For these domestic and particular broils
Are not the question here.
ALBANY  Let’s then determine
With th’ ancient of war on our proceeding.
EDMUND
I shall attend you presently at your tent.
REGAN  Sister, you’ll go with us?
GONERIL  No.
REGAN
’Tis most convenient. Pray, go with us.
GONERIL, aside
Oho, I know the riddle.—I will go.
They begin to exit.
 
Enter Edgar dressed as a peasant.
 
EDGAR, to Albany
If e’er your Grace had speech with man so poor,
Hear me one word.
ALBANY, to those exiting
I’ll overtake you.—Speak.
Both the armies exit.
EDGAR, giving him a paper
Before you fight the battle, ope this letter.
If you have victory, let the trumpet sound
For him that brought it. Wretched though I seem,
I can produce a champion that will prove
What is avouchèd there. If you miscarry,
Your business of the world hath so an end,
And machination ceases. Fortune love you.
ALBANY  Stay till I have read the letter.
EDGAR  I was forbid it.
When time shall serve, let but the herald cry
And I’ll appear again. He exits.
ALBANY
Why, fare thee well. I will o’erlook thy paper.
 
Enter Edmund.
 
EDMUND
The enemy’s in view. Draw up your powers.
Giving him a paper.
Here is the guess of their true strength and forces
By diligent discovery. But your haste
Is now urged on you.
ALBANY  We will greet the time.
He exits.
EDMUND
To both these sisters have I sworn my love,
Each jealous of the other as the stung
Are of the adder. Which of them shall I take?
Both? One? Or neither? Neither can be enjoyed
If both remain alive. To take the widow
Exasperates, makes mad her sister Goneril,
And hardly shall I carry out my side,
Her husband being alive. Now, then, we’ll use
His countenance for the battle, which, being done,
Let her who would be rid of him devise
His speedy taking off. As for the mercy
Which he intends to Lear and to Cordelia,
The battle done and they within our power,
Shall never see his pardon, for my state
Stands on me to defend, not to debate.
He exits.
 
Scene 2
Alarum within. Enter, with Drum and Colors, Lear,
Cordelia, and Soldiers, over the stage, and exit.
Enter Edgar and Gloucester.
 
EDGAR
Here, father, take the shadow of this tree
For your good host. Pray that the right may thrive.
If ever I return to you again,
I’ll bring you comfort.
GLOUCESTER  Grace go with you, sir.
Edgar exits.
Alarum and Retreat within.
 
Enter Edgar.
 
EDGAR
Away, old man. Give me thy hand. Away.
King Lear hath lost, he and his daughter ta’en.
Give me thy hand. Come on.
GLOUCESTER
No further, sir. A man may rot even here.
EDGAR
What, in ill thoughts again? Men must endure
Their going hence even as their coming hither.
Ripeness is all. Come on.
GLOUCESTER  And that’s true too.
They exit.
 
Scene 3
Enter in conquest, with Drum and Colors, Edmund;
Lear and Cordelia as prisoners; Soldiers, Captain.
 
EDMUND
Some officers take them away. Good guard
Until their greater pleasures first be known
That are to censure them.
CORDELIA, to Lear  We are not the first
Who with best meaning have incurred the worst.
For thee, oppressèd king, I am cast down.
Myself could else outfrown false Fortune’s frown.
Shall we not see these daughters and these sisters?
LEAR
No, no, no, no. Come, let’s away to prison.
We two alone will sing like birds i’ th’ cage.
When thou dost ask me blessing, I’ll kneel down
And ask of thee forgiveness. So we’ll live,
And pray, and sing, and tell old tales, and laugh
At gilded butterflies, and hear poor rogues
Talk of court news, and we’ll talk with them too—
Who loses and who wins; who’s in, who’s out—
And take upon ’s the mystery of things,
As if we were God’s spies. And we’ll wear out,
In a walled prison, packs and sects of great ones
That ebb and flow by th’ moon.
EDMUND  Take them away.
LEAR
Upon such sacrifices, my Cordelia,
The gods themselves throw incense. Have I caught
thee?
He that parts us shall bring a brand from heaven
And fire us hence like foxes. Wipe thine eyes.
The good years shall devour them, flesh and fell,
Ere they shall make us weep. We’ll see ’em starved
first.
Come.
Lear and Cordelia exit, with Soldiers.
EDMUND  Come hither, captain. Hark.
Handing him a paper.
Take thou this note. Go follow them to prison.
One step I have advanced thee. If thou dost
As this instructs thee, thou dost make thy way
To noble fortunes. Know thou this: that men
Are as the time is; to be tender-minded
Does not become a sword. Thy great employment
Will not bear question. Either say thou ’lt do ’t,
Or thrive by other means.
CAPTAIN  I’ll do ’t, my lord.
EDMUND
About it, and write “happy” when th’ hast done.
Mark, I say, instantly, and carry it so
As I have set it down.
CAPTAIN
I cannot draw a cart, nor eat dried oats.
If it be man’s work, I’ll do ’t. Captain exits.
 
Flourish. Enter Albany, Goneril, Regan, Soldiers and a
Captain.
 
ALBANY, to Edmund
Sir, you have showed today your valiant strain,
And Fortune led you well. You have the captives
Who were the opposites of this day’s strife.
I do require them of you, so to use them
As we shall find their merits and our safety
May equally determine.
EDMUND  Sir, I thought it fit
To send the old and miserable king
To some retention and appointed guard,
Whose age had charms in it, whose title more,
To pluck the common bosom on his side
And turn our impressed lances in our eyes,
Which do command them. With him I sent the
Queen,
My reason all the same, and they are ready
Tomorrow, or at further space, t’ appear
Where you shall hold your session. At this time
We sweat and bleed. The friend hath lost his friend,
And the best quarrels in the heat are cursed
By those that feel their sharpness.
The question of Cordelia and her father
Requires a fitter place.
ALBANY  Sir, by your patience,
I hold you but a subject of this war,
Not as a brother.
REGAN  That’s as we list to grace him.
Methinks our pleasure might have been demanded
Ere you had spoke so far. He led our powers,
Bore the commission of my place and person,
The which immediacy may well stand up
And call itself your brother.
GONERIL  Not so hot.
In his own grace he doth exalt himself
More than in your addition.
REGAN  In my rights,
By me invested, he compeers the best.
GONERIL
That were the most if he should husband you.
REGAN
Jesters do oft prove prophets.
GONERIL  Holla, holla!
That eye that told you so looked but asquint.
REGAN
Lady, I am not well, else I should answer
From a full-flowing stomach. To Edmund.
General,
Take thou my soldiers, prisoners, patrimony.
Dispose of them, of me; the walls is thine.
Witness the world that I create thee here
My lord and master.
GONERIL  Mean you to enjoy him?
ALBANY
The let-alone lies not in your goodwill.
EDMUND
Nor in thine, lord.
ALBANY  Half-blooded fellow, yes.
REGAN, to Edmund
Let the drum strike, and prove my title thine.
ALBANY
Stay yet, hear reason.—Edmund, I arrest thee
On capital treason; and, in thine attaint,
This gilded serpent.—For your claim, fair
sister,
I bar it in the interest of my wife.
’Tis she is subcontracted to this lord,
And I, her husband, contradict your banns.
If you will marry, make your loves to me.
My lady is bespoke.
GONERIL  An interlude!
ALBANY
Thou art armed, Gloucester. Let the trumpet sound.
If none appear to prove upon thy person
Thy heinous, manifest, and many treasons,
There is my pledge. He throws down a glove.
I’ll make it on thy heart,
Ere I taste bread, thou art in nothing less
Than I have here proclaimed thee.
REGAN  Sick, O, sick!
GONERIL, aside  If not, I’ll ne’er trust medicine.
EDMUND
There’s my exchange. He throws down a glove.
What in the world he is
That names me traitor, villain-like he lies.
Call by the trumpet. He that dares approach,
On him, on you, who not, I will maintain
My truth and honor firmly.
ALBANY
A herald, ho!
EDMUND  A herald, ho, a herald!
ALBANY
Trust to thy single virtue, for thy soldiers,
All levied in my name, have in my name
Took their discharge.
REGAN  My sickness grows upon me.
ALBANY
She is not well. Convey her to my tent.
Regan is helped to exit.
 
Enter a Herald.
 
Come hither, herald. Let the trumpet sound,
And read out this. He hands the Herald a paper.
CAPTAIN  Sound, trumpet!
A trumpet sounds.
HERALD reads.
If any man of quality or degree, within the lists of the
army, will maintain upon Edmund, supposed Earl of
Gloucester, that he is a manifold traitor, let him
appear by the third sound of the trumpet. He is bold in
his defense. First trumpet sounds.
HERALD  Again! Second trumpet sounds.
HERALD  Again! Third trumpet sounds.
Trumpet answers within.
 
Enter Edgar armed.
 
ALBANY, to Herald
Ask him his purposes, why he appears
Upon this call o’ th’ trumpet.
HERALD  What are you?
Your name, your quality, and why you answer
This present summons?
EDGAR  Know my name is lost,
By treason’s tooth bare-gnawn and canker-bit.
Yet am I noble as the adversary
I come to cope.
ALBANY  Which is that adversary?
EDGAR
What’s he that speaks for Edmund, Earl of
Gloucester?
EDMUND
Himself. What sayest thou to him?
EDGAR  Draw thy sword,
That if my speech offend a noble heart,
Thy arm may do thee justice. Here is mine.
He draws his sword.
Behold, it is my privilege, the privilege of mine
honors,
My oath, and my profession. I protest,
Maugre thy strength, place, youth, and eminence,
Despite thy victor-sword and fire-new fortune,
Thy valor, and thy heart, thou art a traitor,
False to thy gods, thy brother, and thy father,
Conspirant ’gainst this high illustrious prince,
And from th’ extremest upward of thy head
To the descent and dust below thy foot,
A most toad-spotted traitor. Say thou “no,”
This sword, this arm, and my best spirits are bent
To prove upon thy heart, whereto I speak,
Thou liest.
EDMUND  In wisdom I should ask thy name,
But since thy outside looks so fair and warlike,
And that thy tongue some say of breeding breathes,
What safe and nicely I might well delay
By rule of knighthood, I disdain and spurn.
Back do I toss these treasons to thy head,
With the hell-hated lie o’erwhelm thy heart,
Which, for they yet glance by and scarcely bruise,
This sword of mine shall give them instant way,
Where they shall rest forever. Trumpets, speak!
He draws his sword. Alarums. Fights.
Edmund falls, wounded.
ALBANY, to Edgar
Save him, save him!
GONERIL  This is practice, Gloucester.
By th’ law of war, thou wast not bound to answer
An unknown opposite. Thou art not vanquished,
But cozened and beguiled.
ALBANY  Shut your mouth, dame,
Or with this paper shall I stopple it.—Hold, sir.—
Thou worse than any name, read thine own evil.
No tearing, lady. I perceive you know it.
GONERIL
Say if I do; the laws are mine, not thine.
Who can arraign me for ’t?
ALBANY  Most monstrous! O!
Know’st thou this paper?
GONERIL  Ask me not what I know.
She exits.
ALBANY
Go after her, she’s desperate. Govern her.
A Soldier exits.
EDMUND, to Edgar
What you have charged me with, that have I done,
And more, much more. The time will bring it out.
’Tis past, and so am I. But what art thou
That hast this fortune on me? If thou ’rt noble,
I do forgive thee.
EDGAR  Let’s exchange charity.
I am no less in blood than thou art, Edmund;
If more, the more th’ hast wronged me.
My name is Edgar and thy father’s son.
The gods are just, and of our pleasant vices
Make instruments to plague us.
The dark and vicious place where thee he got
Cost him his eyes.
EDMUND  Th’ hast spoken right. ’Tis true.
The wheel is come full circle; I am here.
ALBANY, to Edgar
Methought thy very gait did prophesy
A royal nobleness. I must embrace thee.
Let sorrow split my heart if ever I
Did hate thee or thy father!
EDGAR  Worthy prince, I know ’t.
ALBANY  Where have you hid yourself?
How have you known the miseries of your father?
EDGAR
By nursing them, my lord. List a brief tale,
And when ’tis told, O, that my heart would burst!
The bloody proclamation to escape
That followed me so near—O, our lives’ sweetness,
That we the pain of death would hourly die
Rather than die at once!—taught me to shift
Into a madman’s rags, t’ assume a semblance
That very dogs disdained, and in this habit
Met I my father with his bleeding rings,
Their precious stones new lost; became his guide,
Led him, begged for him, saved him from despair.
Never—O fault!—revealed myself unto him
Until some half hour past, when I was armed.
Not sure, though hoping of this good success,
I asked his blessing, and from first to last
Told him our pilgrimage. But his flawed heart
(Alack, too weak the conflict to support)
’Twixt two extremes of passion, joy and grief,
Burst smilingly.
EDMUND  This speech of yours hath moved me,
And shall perchance do good. But speak you on.
You look as you had something more to say.
ALBANY
If there be more, more woeful, hold it in,
For I am almost ready to dissolve,
Hearing of this.
EDGAR  This would have seemed a period
To such as love not sorrow; but another,
To amplify too much, would make much more
And top extremity. Whilst I
Was big in clamor, came there in a man
Who, having seen me in my worst estate,
Shunned my abhorred society; but then, finding
Who ’twas that so endured, with his strong arms
He fastened on my neck and bellowed out
As he’d burst heaven, threw him on my father,
Told the most piteous tale of Lear and him
That ever ear received, which, in recounting,
His grief grew puissant, and the strings of life
Began to crack. Twice then the trumpets sounded,
And there I left him tranced.
ALBANY  But who was this?
EDGAR
Kent, sir, the banished Kent, who in disguise
Followed his enemy king and did him service
Improper for a slave.
 
Enter a Gentleman with a bloody knife.
 
GENTLEMAN
Help, help, O, help!
EDGAR  What kind of help?
ALBANY, to Gentleman  Speak, man!
EDGAR  What means this bloody knife?
GENTLEMAN
’Tis hot, it smokes! It came even from the heart
Of—O, she’s dead!
ALBANY  Who dead? Speak, man.
GENTLEMAN
Your lady, sir, your lady. And her sister
By her is poisoned. She confesses it.
EDMUND
I was contracted to them both. All three
Now marry in an instant.
EDGAR  Here comes Kent.
 
Enter Kent.
 
ALBANY, to the Gentleman
Produce the bodies, be they alive or dead.
Gentleman exits.
This judgment of the heavens, that makes us
tremble,
Touches us not with pity. O, is this he?
To Kent. The time will not allow the compliment
Which very manners urges.
KENT  I am come
To bid my king and master aye goodnight.
Is he not here?
ALBANY  Great thing of us forgot!
Speak, Edmund, where’s the King? And where’s
Cordelia?
Goneril and Regan’s bodies brought out.
Seest thou this object, Kent?
KENT  Alack, why thus?
EDMUND  Yet Edmund was beloved.
The one the other poisoned for my sake,
And after slew herself.
ALBANY  Even so.—Cover their faces.
EDMUND
I pant for life. Some good I mean to do
Despite of mine own nature. Quickly send—
Be brief in it—to th’ castle, for my writ
Is on the life of Lear, and on Cordelia.
Nay, send in time.
ALBANY  Run, run, O, run!
EDGAR
To who, my lord? To Edmund. Who has the office?
Send
Thy token of reprieve.
EDMUND
Well thought on. Take my sword. Give it the
Captain.
EDGAR, to a Soldier  Haste thee for thy life.
The Soldier exits with Edmund’s sword.
EDMUND, to Albany
He hath commission from thy wife and me
To hang Cordelia in the prison, and
To lay the blame upon her own despair,
That she fordid herself.
ALBANY
The gods defend her!—Bear him hence awhile.
Edmund is carried off.
 
Enter Lear with Cordelia in his arms,
followed by a Gentleman.
 
LEAR
Howl, howl, howl! O, you are men of stones!
Had I your tongues and eyes, I’d use them so
That heaven’s vault should crack. She’s gone
forever.
I know when one is dead and when one lives.
She’s dead as earth.—Lend me a looking glass.
If that her breath will mist or stain the stone,
Why, then she lives.
KENT  Is this the promised end?
EDGAR
Or image of that horror?
ALBANY  Fall and cease.
LEAR
This feather stirs. She lives. If it be so,
It is a chance which does redeem all sorrows
That ever I have felt.
KENT  O, my good master—
LEAR
Prithee, away.
EDGAR  ’Tis noble Kent, your friend.
LEAR
A plague upon you, murderers, traitors all!
I might have saved her. Now she’s gone forever.—
Cordelia, Cordelia, stay a little. Ha!
What is ’t thou sayst?—Her voice was ever soft,
Gentle, and low, an excellent thing in woman.
I killed the slave that was a-hanging thee.
GENTLEMAN
’Tis true, my lords, he did.
LEAR  Did I not, fellow?
I have seen the day, with my good biting falchion
I would have made him skip. I am old now,
And these same crosses spoil me. To Kent. Who
are you?
Mine eyes are not o’ th’ best. I’ll tell you straight.
KENT
If Fortune brag of two she loved and hated,
One of them we behold.
LEAR
This is a dull sight. Are you not Kent?
KENT  The same,
Your servant Kent. Where is your servant Caius?
LEAR
He’s a good fellow, I can tell you that.
He’ll strike and quickly too. He’s dead and rotten.
KENT
No, my good lord, I am the very man—
LEAR  I’ll see that straight.
KENT
That from your first of difference and decay
Have followed your sad steps.
LEAR  You are welcome
hither.
KENT
Nor no man else. All’s cheerless, dark, and deadly.
Your eldest daughters have fordone themselves,
And desperately are dead.
LEAR  Ay, so I think.
ALBANY
He knows not what he says, and vain is it
That we present us to him.
EDGAR  Very bootless.
 
Enter a Messenger.
 
MESSENGER  Edmund is dead, my lord.
ALBANY  That’s but a trifle here.—
You lords and noble friends, know our intent:
What comfort to this great decay may come
Shall be applied. For us, we will resign,
During the life of this old Majesty,
To him our absolute power; you to your rights,
With boot and such addition as your Honors
Have more than merited. All friends shall taste
The wages of their virtue, and all foes
The cup of their deservings. O, see, see!
LEAR
And my poor fool is hanged. No, no, no life?
Why should a dog, a horse, a rat have life,
And thou no breath at all? Thou ’lt come no more,
Never, never, never, never, never.—
Pray you undo this button. Thank you, sir.
Do you see this? Look on her, look, her lips,
Look there, look there! He dies.
EDGAR  He faints. To Lear. My lord,
my lord!
KENT
Break, heart, I prithee, break!
EDGAR  Look up, my lord.
KENT
Vex not his ghost. O, let him pass! He hates him
That would upon the rack of this tough world
Stretch him out longer.
EDGAR  He is gone indeed.
KENT
The wonder is he hath endured so long.
He but usurped his life.
ALBANY
Bear them from hence. Our present business
Is general woe. To Edgar and Kent. Friends of my
soul, you twain
Rule in this realm, and the gored state sustain.
KENT
I have a journey, sir, shortly to go;
My master calls me. I must not say no.
EDGAR
The weight of this sad time we must obey,
Speak what we feel, not what we ought to say.
The oldest hath borne most; we that are young
Shall never see so much nor live so long.
They exit with a dead march.
 

Coriolanus

ACT 1

Scene 1
Enter a company of mutinous Citizens with staves,
clubs, and other weapons.

FIRST CITIZEN  Before we proceed any further, hear me
speak.
ALL  Speak, speak!
FIRST CITIZEN  You are all resolved rather to die than to
famish?
ALL  Resolved, resolved!
FIRST CITIZEN  First, you know Caius Martius is chief
enemy to the people.
ALL  We know ’t, we know ’t!
FIRST CITIZEN  Let us kill him, and we’ll have corn at
our own price. Is ’t a verdict?
ALL  No more talking on ’t; let it be done. Away, away!
SECOND CITIZEN  One word, good citizens.
FIRST CITIZEN  We are accounted poor citizens, the patricians
good. What authority surfeits on would
relieve us. If they would yield us but the superfluity
while it were wholesome, we might guess they
relieved us humanely. But they think we are too
dear. The leanness that afflicts us, the object of our
misery, is as an inventory to particularize their
abundance; our sufferance is a gain to them. Let
us revenge this with our pikes ere we become
rakes; for the gods know I speak this in hunger for
bread, not in thirst for revenge.
SECOND CITIZEN  Would you proceed especially against
Caius Martius?
ALL  Against him first. He’s a very dog to the
commonalty.
SECOND CITIZEN  Consider you what services he has
done for his country?
FIRST CITIZEN  Very well, and could be content to give
him good report for ’t, but that he pays himself
with being proud.
SECOND CITIZEN  Nay, but speak not maliciously.
FIRST CITIZEN  I say unto you, what he hath done
famously he did it to that end. Though soft-conscienced
men can be content to say it was for
his country, he did it to please his mother and to be
partly proud, which he is, even to the altitude of
his virtue.
SECOND CITIZEN  What he cannot help in his nature you
account a vice in him. You must in no way say he
is covetous.
FIRST CITIZEN  If I must not, I need not be barren of accusations.
He hath faults, with surplus, to tire in
repetition. (Shouts within.) What shouts are these?
The other side o’ th’ city is risen. Why stay we prating
here? To th’ Capitol!
ALL  Come, come!

Enter Menenius Agrippa.

FIRST CITIZEN  Soft, who comes here?
SECOND CITIZEN  Worthy Menenius Agrippa, one that
hath always loved the people.
FIRST CITIZEN  He’s one honest enough. Would all the
rest were so!
MENENIUS
What work ’s, my countrymen, in hand? Where go
you
With bats and clubs? The matter? Speak, I pray you.
SECOND CITIZEN  Our business is not unknown to th’
Senate. They have had inkling this fortnight what
we intend to do, which now we’ll show ’em in
deeds. They say poor suitors have strong breaths;
they shall know we have strong arms too.
MENENIUS
Why, masters, my good friends, mine honest
neighbors,
Will you undo yourselves?
SECOND CITIZEN
We cannot, sir; we are undone already.
MENENIUS
I tell you, friends, most charitable care
Have the patricians of you. For your wants,
Your suffering in this dearth, you may as well
Strike at the heaven with your staves as lift them
Against the Roman state, whose course will on
The way it takes, cracking ten thousand curbs
Of more strong link asunder than can ever
Appear in your impediment. For the dearth,
The gods, not the patricians, make it, and
Your knees to them, not arms, must help. Alack,
You are transported by calamity
Thither where more attends you, and you slander
The helms o’ th’ state, who care for you like fathers,
When you curse them as enemies.
SECOND CITIZEN  Care for us? True, indeed! They ne’er
cared for us yet. Suffer us to famish, and their
storehouses crammed with grain; make edicts for
usury to support usurers; repeal daily any wholesome
act established against the rich, and provide
more piercing statutes daily to chain up and restrain
the poor. If the wars eat us not up, they will;
and there’s all the love they bear us.
MENENIUS
Either you must confess yourselves wondrous
malicious
Or be accused of folly. I shall tell you
A pretty tale. It may be you have heard it,
But since it serves my purpose, I will venture
To stale ’t a little more.
SECOND CITIZEN  Well, I’ll hear it, sir; yet you must not
think to fob off our disgrace with a tale. But, an ’t
please you, deliver.
MENENIUS
There was a time when all the body’s members
Rebelled against the belly, thus accused it:
That only like a gulf it did remain
I’ th’ midst o’ th’ body, idle and unactive,
Still cupboarding the viand, never bearing
Like labor with the rest, where th’ other instruments
Did see and hear, devise, instruct, walk, feel,
And, mutually participate, did minister
Unto the appetite and affection common
Of the whole body. The belly answered—
SECOND CITIZEN  Well, sir, what answer made the belly?
MENENIUS
Sir, I shall tell you. With a kind of smile,
Which ne’er came from the lungs, but even thus—
For, look you, I may make the belly smile
As well as speak—it tauntingly replied
To th’ discontented members, the mutinous parts
That envied his receipt; even so most fitly
As you malign our senators for that
They are not such as you.
SECOND CITIZEN  Your belly’s answer—what?
The kingly crownèd head, the vigilant eye,
The counselor heart, the arm our soldier,
Our steed the leg, the tongue our trumpeter,
With other muniments and petty helps
In this our fabric, if that they—
MENENIUS  What then?
’Fore me, this fellow speaks. What then? What then?
SECOND CITIZEN
Should by the cormorant belly be restrained,
Who is the sink o’ th’ body—
MENENIUS  Well, what then?
SECOND CITIZEN
The former agents, if they did complain,
What could the belly answer?
MENENIUS  I will tell you,
If you’ll bestow a small—of what you have little—
Patience awhile, you’st hear the belly’s answer.
SECOND CITIZEN
You’re long about it.
MENENIUS  Note me this, good friend;
Your most grave belly was deliberate,
Not rash like his accusers, and thus answered:
“True is it, my incorporate friends,” quoth he,
“That I receive the general food at first
Which you do live upon; and fit it is,
Because I am the storehouse and the shop
Of the whole body. But, if you do remember,
I send it through the rivers of your blood
Even to the court, the heart, to th’ seat o’ th’ brain;
And, through the cranks and offices of man,
The strongest nerves and small inferior veins
From me receive that natural competency
Whereby they live. And though that all at once,
You, my good friends”—this says the belly, mark
me—
SECOND CITIZEN
Ay, sir, well, well.
MENENIUS  “Though all at once cannot
See what I do deliver out to each,
Yet I can make my audit up, that all
From me do back receive the flour of all,
And leave me but the bran.” What say you to ’t?
SECOND CITIZEN
It was an answer. How apply you this?
MENENIUS
The senators of Rome are this good belly,
And you the mutinous members. For examine
Their counsels and their cares, digest things rightly
Touching the weal o’ th’ common, you shall find
No public benefit which you receive
But it proceeds or comes from them to you
And no way from yourselves. What do you think,
You, the great toe of this assembly?
SECOND CITIZEN  I the great toe? Why the great toe?
MENENIUS
For that, being one o’ th’ lowest, basest, poorest,
Of this most wise rebellion, thou goest foremost.
Thou rascal, that art worst in blood to run,
Lead’st first to win some vantage.
But make you ready your stiff bats and clubs.
Rome and her rats are at the point of battle;
The one side must have bale.

Enter Caius Martius.

Hail, noble Martius.
MARTIUS
Thanks.—What’s the matter, you dissentious rogues,
That, rubbing the poor itch of your opinion,
Make yourselves scabs?
SECOND CITIZEN  We have ever your good word.
MARTIUS
He that will give good words to thee will flatter
Beneath abhorring. What would you have, you curs,
That like nor peace nor war? The one affrights you;
The other makes you proud. He that trusts to you,
Where he should find you lions, finds you hares;
Where foxes, geese. You are no surer, no,
Than is the coal of fire upon the ice
Or hailstone in the sun. Your virtue is
To make him worthy whose offense subdues him,
And curse that justice did it. Who deserves greatness
Deserves your hate; and your affections are
A sick man’s appetite, who desires most that
Which would increase his evil. He that depends
Upon your favors swims with fins of lead,
And hews down oaks with rushes. Hang you! Trust
you?
With every minute you do change a mind
And call him noble that was now your hate,
Him vile that was your garland. What’s the matter,
That in these several places of the city
You cry against the noble senate, who,
Under the gods, keep you in awe, which else
Would feed on one another?—What’s their seeking?
MENENIUS
For corn at their own rates, whereof they say
The city is well stored.
MARTIUS  Hang ’em! They say?
They’ll sit by th’ fire and presume to know
What’s done i’ th’ Capitol, who’s like to rise,
Who thrives, and who declines; side factions and
give out
Conjectural marriages, making parties strong
And feebling such as stand not in their liking
Below their cobbled shoes. They say there’s grain
enough?
Would the nobility lay aside their ruth
And let me use my sword, I’d make a quarry
With thousands of these quartered slaves as high
As I could pick my lance.
MENENIUS
Nay, these are almost thoroughly persuaded;
For though abundantly they lack discretion,
Yet are they passing cowardly. But I beseech you,
What says the other troop?
MARTIUS  They are dissolved. Hang
’em!
They said they were an-hungry, sighed forth
proverbs
That hunger broke stone walls, that dogs must eat,
That meat was made for mouths, that the gods sent
not
Corn for the rich men only. With these shreds
They vented their complainings, which being
answered
And a petition granted them—a strange one,
To break the heart of generosity
And make bold power look pale—they threw their
caps
As they would hang them on the horns o’ th’ moon,
Shouting their emulation.
MENENIUS  What is granted them?
MARTIUS
Five tribunes to defend their vulgar wisdoms,
Of their own choice. One’s Junius Brutus,
Sicinius Velutus, and I know not. ’Sdeath!
The rabble should have first unroofed the city
Ere so prevailed with me. It will in time
Win upon power and throw forth greater themes
For insurrection’s arguing.
MENENIUS  This is strange.
MARTIUS  Go get you home, you fragments.

Enter a Messenger hastily.

MESSENGER
Where’s Caius Martius?
MARTIUS  Here. What’s the matter?
MESSENGER
The news is, sir, the Volsces are in arms.
MARTIUS
I am glad on ’t. Then we shall ha’ means to vent
Our musty superfluity.

Enter Sicinius Velutus, Junius Brutus, (two Tribunes);
Cominius, Titus Lartius, with other Senators.

See our best elders.
FIRST SENATOR
Martius, ’tis true that you have lately told us:
The Volsces are in arms.
MARTIUS  They have a leader,
Tullus Aufidius, that will put you to ’t.
I sin in envying his nobility,
And, were I anything but what I am,
I would wish me only he.
COMINIUS  You have fought together?
MARTIUS
Were half to half the world by th’ ears and he
Upon my party, I’d revolt, to make
Only my wars with him. He is a lion
That I am proud to hunt.
FIRST SENATOR  Then, worthy Martius,
Attend upon Cominius to these wars.
COMINIUS
It is your former promise.
MARTIUS  Sir, it is,
And I am constant.—Titus Lartius, thou
Shalt see me once more strike at Tullus’ face.
What, art thou stiff? Stand’st out?
LARTIUS  No, Caius Martius,
I’ll lean upon one crutch and fight with t’ other
Ere stay behind this business.
MENENIUS  O, true bred!
FIRST SENATOR
Your company to th’ Capitol, where I know
Our greatest friends attend us.
LARTIUS, to Cominius  Lead you on.—
To Martius. Follow Cominius. We must follow you;
Right worthy you priority.
COMINIUS  Noble Martius.
FIRST SENATOR, to the Citizens
Hence to your homes, begone.
MARTIUS  Nay, let them follow.
The Volsces have much corn; take these rats thither
To gnaw their garners.
Citizens steal away.
Worshipful mutineers,
Your valor puts well forth.—Pray follow.
They exit. Sicinius and Brutus remain.
SICINIUS
Was ever man so proud as is this Martius?
BRUTUS  He has no equal.
SICINIUS
When we were chosen tribunes for the people—
BRUTUS
Marked you his lip and eyes?
SICINIUS  Nay, but his taunts.
BRUTUS
Being moved, he will not spare to gird the gods—
SICINIUS  Bemock the modest moon.
BRUTUS
The present wars devour him! He is grown
Too proud to be so valiant.
SICINIUS  Such a nature,
Tickled with good success, disdains the shadow
Which he treads on at noon. But I do wonder
His insolence can brook to be commanded
Under Cominius.
BRUTUS  Fame, at the which he aims,
In whom already he’s well graced, cannot
Better be held nor more attained than by
A place below the first; for what miscarries
Shall be the General’s fault, though he perform
To th’ utmost of a man, and giddy censure
Will then cry out of Martius “O, if he
Had borne the business!”
SICINIUS  Besides, if things go well,
Opinion that so sticks on Martius shall
Of his demerits rob Cominius.
BRUTUS  Come.
Half all Cominius’ honors are to Martius,
Though Martius earned them not, and all his faults
To Martius shall be honors, though indeed
In aught he merit not.
SICINIUS  Let’s hence and hear
How the dispatch is made, and in what fashion,
More than his singularity, he goes
Upon this present action.
BRUTUS  Let’s along.
They exit.

Scene 2
Enter Tullus Aufidius with Senators of Corioles.

FIRST SENATOR
So, your opinion is, Aufidius,
That they of Rome are entered in our counsels
And know how we proceed.
AUFIDIUS  Is it not yours?
Whatever have been thought on in this state
That could be brought to bodily act ere Rome
Had circumvention? ’Tis not four days gone
Since I heard thence. These are the words—I think
I have the letter here. Yes, here it is.
(He reads.) They have pressed a power, but it is not
known
Whether for east or west. The dearth is great.
The people mutinous; and, it is rumored,
Cominius, Martius your old enemy,
Who is of Rome worse hated than of you,
And Titus Lartius, a most valiant Roman,
These three lead on this preparation
Whither ’tis bent. Most likely ’tis for you.
Consider of it.
FIRST SENATOR  Our army’s in the field.
We never yet made doubt but Rome was ready
To answer us.
AUFIDIUS  Nor did you think it folly
To keep your great pretenses veiled till when
They needs must show themselves, which, in the
hatching,
It seemed, appeared to Rome. By the discovery
We shall be shortened in our aim, which was
To take in many towns ere almost Rome
Should know we were afoot.
SECOND SENATOR  Noble Aufidius,
Take your commission; hie you to your bands.
Let us alone to guard Corioles.
If they set down before ’s, for the remove
Bring up your army. But I think you’ll find
They’ve not prepared for us.
AUFIDIUS  O, doubt not that;
I speak from certainties. Nay, more,
Some parcels of their power are forth already,
And only hitherward. I leave your Honors.
If we and Caius Martius chance to meet,
’Tis sworn between us we shall ever strike
Till one can do no more.
ALL  The gods assist you!
AUFIDIUS  And keep your Honors safe!
FIRST SENATOR  Farewell.
SECOND SENATOR  Farewell.
ALL  Farewell.
All exit.

Scene 3
Enter Volumnia and Virgilia, mother and wife
to Martius. They set them down on two low stools
and sew.

VOLUMNIA  I pray you, daughter, sing, or express yourself
in a more comfortable sort. If my son were my
husband, I should freelier rejoice in that absence
wherein he won honor than in the embracements
of his bed where he would show most love. When
yet he was but tender-bodied and the only son of
my womb, when youth with comeliness plucked
all gaze his way, when for a day of kings’ entreaties
a mother should not sell him an hour from her beholding,
I, considering how honor would become
such a person—that it was no better than picture-like
to hang by th’ wall, if renown made it not
stir—was pleased to let him seek danger where he
was like to find fame. To a cruel war I sent him,
from whence he returned, his brows bound with
oak. I tell thee, daughter, I sprang not more in joy
at first hearing he was a man-child than now in
first seeing he had proved himself a man.
VIRGILIA  But had he died in the business, madam, how
then?
VOLUMNIA  Then his good report should have been my
son; I therein would have found issue. Hear me
profess sincerely: had I a dozen sons, each in my
love alike and none less dear than thine and my
good Martius, I had rather had eleven die nobly
for their country than one voluptuously surfeit out
of action.

Enter a Gentlewoman.

GENTLEWOMAN  Madam, the Lady Valeria is come to
visit you.
VIRGILIA
Beseech you, give me leave to retire myself.
VOLUMNIA  Indeed you shall not.
Methinks I hear hither your husband’s drum,
See him pluck Aufidius down by th’ hair;
As children from a bear, the Volsces shunning him.
Methinks I see him stamp thus and call thus:
“Come on, you cowards! You were got in fear,
Though you were born in Rome.” His bloody brow
With his mailed hand then wiping, forth he goes
Like to a harvestman that’s tasked to mow
Or all or lose his hire.
VIRGILIA
His bloody brow? O Jupiter, no blood!
VOLUMNIA
Away, you fool! It more becomes a man
Than gilt his trophy. The breasts of Hecuba,
When she did suckle Hector, looked not lovelier
Than Hector’s forehead when it spit forth blood
At Grecian sword, contemning.—Tell Valeria
We are fit to bid her welcome.	Gentlewoman exits.
VIRGILIA
Heavens bless my lord from fell Aufidius!
VOLUMNIA
He’ll beat Aufidius’ head below his knee
And tread upon his neck.

Enter Valeria with an Usher and a Gentlewoman.

VALERIA  My ladies both, good day to you.
VOLUMNIA  Sweet madam.
VIRGILIA  I am glad to see your Ladyship.
VALERIA  How do you both? You are manifest housekeepers.
What are you sewing here? A fine spot, in
good faith. How does your little son?
VIRGILIA  I thank your Ladyship; well, good madam.
VOLUMNIA  He had rather see the swords and hear a
drum than look upon his schoolmaster.
VALERIA  O’ my word, the father’s son! I’ll swear ’tis a
very pretty boy. O’ my troth, I looked upon him o’
Wednesday half an hour together. H’as such a confirmed
countenance. I saw him run after a gilded
butterfly, and when he caught it, he let it go again,
and after it again, and over and over he comes,
and up again, catched it again. Or whether his fall
enraged him or how ’twas, he did so set his teeth
and tear it. O, I warrant how he mammocked it!
VOLUMNIA  One on ’s father’s moods.
VALERIA  Indeed, la, ’tis a noble child.
VIRGILIA  A crack, madam.
VALERIA  Come, lay aside your stitchery. I must have
you play the idle huswife with me this afternoon.
VIRGILIA  No, good madam, I will not out of doors.
VALERIA  Not out of doors?
VOLUMNIA  She shall, she shall.
VIRGILIA  Indeed, no, by your patience. I’ll not over the
threshold till my lord return from the wars.
VALERIA  Fie, you confine yourself most unreasonably.
Come, you must go visit the good lady that lies in.
VIRGILIA  I will wish her speedy strength and visit her
with my prayers, but I cannot go thither.
VOLUMNIA  Why, I pray you?
VIRGILIA  ’Tis not to save labor, nor that I want love.
VALERIA  You would be another Penelope. Yet they say
all the yarn she spun in Ulysses’ absence did but fill
Ithaca full of moths. Come, I would your cambric
were sensible as your finger, that you might leave
pricking it for pity. Come, you shall go with us.
VIRGILIA  No, good madam, pardon me; indeed, I will
not forth.
VALERIA  In truth, la, go with me, and I’ll tell you excellent
news of your husband.
VIRGILIA  O, good madam, there can be none yet.
VALERIA  Verily, I do not jest with you. There came
news from him last night.
VIRGILIA  Indeed, madam!
VALERIA  In earnest, it’s true. I heard a senator speak it.
Thus it is: the Volsces have an army forth, against
whom Cominius the General is gone with one
part of our Roman power. Your lord and Titus Lartius
are set down before their city Corioles. They
nothing doubt prevailing, and to make it brief
wars. This is true, on mine honor, and so, I pray, go
with us.
VIRGILIA  Give me excuse, good madam. I will obey you
in everything hereafter.
VOLUMNIA  Let her alone, lady. As she is now, she will
but disease our better mirth.
VALERIA  In troth, I think she would.—Fare you well,
then.—Come, good sweet lady.—Prithee, Virgilia,
turn thy solemness out o’ door, and go along with
us.
VIRGILIA  No, at a word, madam. Indeed, I must not. I
wish you much mirth.
VALERIA  Well, then, farewell.
Ladies exit.

Scene 4
Enter Martius, Titus Lartius, with Trumpet, Drum,
and Colors, with Captains and Soldiers, as before
the city of Corioles. To them a Messenger.

MARTIUS
Yonder comes news. A wager they have met.
LARTIUS
My horse to yours, no.
MARTIUS  ’Tis done.
LARTIUS  Agreed.
MARTIUS, to Messenger
Say, has our general met the enemy?
MESSENGER
They lie in view but have not spoke as yet.
LARTIUS
So the good horse is mine.
MARTIUS  I’ll buy him of you.
LARTIUS
No, I’ll nor sell nor give him. Lend you him I will
For half a hundred years.—Summon the town.
MARTIUS  How far off lie these armies?
MESSENGER  Within this mile and half.
MARTIUS
Then shall we hear their ’larum and they ours.
Now, Mars, I prithee, make us quick in work,
That we with smoking swords may march from
hence
To help our fielded friends!—Come, blow thy blast.
They sound a parley.

Enter two Senators with others on the walls of Corioles.

Tullus Aufidius, is he within your walls?
FIRST SENATOR
No, nor a man that fears you less than he:
That’s lesser than a little.	Drum afar off.
Hark, our drums
Are bringing forth our youth. We’ll break our walls
Rather than they shall pound us up. Our gates,
Which yet seem shut, we have but pinned with
rushes.
They’ll open of themselves.	Alarum far off.
Hark you, far off!
There is Aufidius. List what work he makes
Amongst your cloven army.
They exit from the walls.
MARTIUS  O, they are at it!
LARTIUS
Their noise be our instruction.—Ladders, ho!

Enter the Army of the Volsces as through the city gates.

MARTIUS
They fear us not but issue forth their city.—
Now put your shields before your hearts, and fight
With hearts more proof than shields.—Advance,
brave Titus.
They do disdain us much beyond our thoughts,
Which makes me sweat with wrath.—Come on, my
fellows!
He that retires, I’ll take him for a Volsce,
And he shall feel mine edge.
Alarum. The Romans are beat back to their trenches.
They exit, with the Volsces following.

Enter Martius cursing, with Roman soldiers.

MARTIUS
All the contagion of the south light on you,
You shames of Rome! You herd of—Boils and
plagues
Plaster you o’er, that you may be abhorred
Farther than seen, and one infect another
Against the wind a mile! You souls of geese,
That bear the shapes of men, how have you run
From slaves that apes would beat! Pluto and hell!
All hurt behind. Backs red, and faces pale
With flight and agued fear! Mend, and charge home,
Or, by the fires of heaven, I’ll leave the foe
And make my wars on you. Look to ’t. Come on!
If you’ll stand fast, we’ll beat them to their wives,
As they us to our trenches. Follow ’s!

Another alarum. The Volsces re-enter and are driven
back to the gates of Corioles, which open to admit
them.

So, now the gates are ope. Now prove good
seconds!
’Tis for the followers fortune widens them,
Not for the fliers. Mark me, and do the like.
Martius follows the fleeing Volsces through
the gates, and is shut in.
FIRST SOLDIER  Foolhardiness, not I.
SECOND SOLDIER  Nor I.
FIRST SOLDIER  See they have shut him in.
Alarum continues.
ALL  To th’ pot, I warrant him.

Enter Titus Lartius.

LARTIUS
What is become of Martius?
ALL  Slain, sir, doubtless.
FIRST SOLDIER
Following the fliers at the very heels,
With them he enters, who upon the sudden
Clapped to their gates. He is himself alone,
To answer all the city.
LARTIUS  O, noble fellow,
Who sensibly outdares his senseless sword,
And when it bows, stand’st up! Thou art left,
Martius.
A carbuncle entire, as big as thou art,
Were not so rich a jewel. Thou wast a soldier
Even to Cato’s wish, not fierce and terrible
Only in strokes, but with thy grim looks and
The thunderlike percussion of thy sounds
Thou mad’st thine enemies shake, as if the world
Were feverous and did tremble.

Enter Martius, bleeding, as if from Corioles, assaulted
by the enemy.

FIRST SOLDIER  Look, sir.
LARTIUS  O, ’tis Martius!
Let’s fetch him off or make remain alike.
They fight, and all enter the city, exiting the stage.

Scene 5
Enter certain Romans, with spoils.

FIRST ROMAN  This will I carry to Rome.
SECOND ROMAN  And I this.
THIRD ROMAN  A murrain on ’t! I took this for silver.

Enter Martius, and Titus Lartius with a Trumpet.

MARTIUS
See here these movers that do prize their hours
At a cracked drachma. Cushions, leaden spoons,
Irons of a doit, doublets that hangmen would
Bury with those that wore them, these base slaves,
Ere yet the fight be done, pack up. Down with them!
The Romans with spoils exit.
Alarum continues still afar off.
And hark, what noise the General makes! To him!
There is the man of my soul’s hate, Aufidius,
Piercing our Romans. Then, valiant Titus, take
Convenient numbers to make good the city,
Whilst I, with those that have the spirit, will haste
To help Cominius.
LARTIUS  Worthy sir, thou bleed’st.
Thy exercise hath been too violent
For a second course of fight.
MARTIUS  Sir, praise me not.
My work hath yet not warmed me. Fare you well.
The blood I drop is rather physical
Than dangerous to me. To Aufidius thus
I will appear and fight.
LARTIUS  Now the fair goddess Fortune
Fall deep in love with thee, and her great charms
Misguide thy opposers’ swords! Bold gentleman,
Prosperity be thy page!
MARTIUS  Thy friend no less
Than those she placeth highest! So farewell.
LARTIUS  Thou worthiest Martius!	Martius exits.
Go sound thy trumpet in the marketplace.
Call thither all the officers o’ th’ town,
Where they shall know our mind. Away!
They exit.

Scene 6
Enter Cominius as it were in retire, with Soldiers.

COMINIUS
Breathe you, my friends. Well fought! We are come
off
Like Romans, neither foolish in our stands
Nor cowardly in retire. Believe me, sirs,
We shall be charged again. Whiles we have struck,
By interims and conveying gusts we have heard
The charges of our friends. The Roman gods
Lead their successes as we wish our own,
That both our powers, with smiling fronts
encount’ring,
May give you thankful sacrifice!

Enter a Messenger.

Thy news?
MESSENGER
The citizens of Corioles have issued
And given to Lartius and to Martius battle.
I saw our party to their trenches driven,
And then I came away.
COMINIUS  Though thou speakest truth,
Methinks thou speak’st not well. How long is ’t
since?
MESSENGER  Above an hour, my lord.
COMINIUS
’Tis not a mile; briefly we heard their drums.
How couldst thou in a mile confound an hour
And bring thy news so late?
MESSENGER  Spies of the Volsces
Held me in chase, that I was forced to wheel
Three or four miles about; else had I, sir,
Half an hour since brought my report.	He exits.

Enter Martius, bloody.

COMINIUS  Who’s yonder,
That does appear as he were flayed? O gods,
He has the stamp of Martius, and I have
Before-time seen him thus.
MARTIUS  Come I too late?
COMINIUS
The shepherd knows not thunder from a tabor
More than I know the sound of Martius’ tongue
From every meaner man.
MARTIUS  Come I too late?
COMINIUS
Ay, if you come not in the blood of others,
But mantled in your own.
MARTIUS  O, let me clip you
In arms as sound as when I wooed, in heart
As merry as when our nuptial day was done
And tapers burnt to bedward!	They embrace.
COMINIUS
Flower of warriors, how is ’t with Titus Lartius?
MARTIUS
As with a man busied about decrees,
Condemning some to death and some to exile;
Ransoming him or pitying, threat’ning th’ other;
Holding Corioles in the name of Rome
Even like a fawning greyhound in the leash,
To let him slip at will.
COMINIUS  Where is that slave
Which told me they had beat you to your trenches?
Where is he? Call him hither.
MARTIUS  Let him alone.
He did inform the truth. But for our gentlemen,
The common file—a plague! Tribunes for them!—
The mouse ne’er shunned the cat as they did budge
From rascals worse than they.
COMINIUS  But how prevailed you?
MARTIUS
Will the time serve to tell? I do not think.
Where is the enemy? Are you lords o’ th’ field?
If not, why cease you till you are so?
COMINIUS
Martius, we have at disadvantage fought
And did retire to win our purpose.
MARTIUS
How lies their battle? Know you on which side
They have placed their men of trust?
COMINIUS  As I guess,
Martius,
Their bands i’ th’ vaward are the Antiates,
Of their best trust; o’er them Aufidius,
Their very heart of hope.
MARTIUS  I do beseech you,
By all the battles wherein we have fought,
By th’ blood we have shed together, by th’ vows we
have made
To endure friends, that you directly set me
Against Aufidius and his Antiates,
And that you not delay the present, but,
Filling the air with swords advanced and darts,
We prove this very hour.
COMINIUS  Though I could wish
You were conducted to a gentle bath
And balms applied to you, yet dare I never
Deny your asking. Take your choice of those
That best can aid your action.
MARTIUS  Those are they
That most are willing. If any such be here—
As it were sin to doubt—that love this painting
Wherein you see me smeared; if any fear
Lesser his person than an ill report;
If any think brave death outweighs bad life,
And that his country’s dearer than himself;
Let him alone, or so many so minded,
Wave thus to express his disposition
And follow Martius.	He waves his sword.
They all shout and wave their swords,
take him up in their arms, and cast up their caps.
O, me alone! Make you a sword of me?
If these shows be not outward, which of you
But is four Volsces? None of you but is
Able to bear against the great Aufidius
A shield as hard as his. A certain number,
Though thanks to all, must I select from all.
The rest shall bear the business in some other fight,
As cause will be obeyed. Please you to march,
And I shall quickly draw out my command,
Which men are best inclined.
COMINIUS  March on, my fellows.
Make good this ostentation, and you shall
Divide in all with us.
They exit.

Scene 7
Titus Lartius, having set a guard upon Corioles, going
with Drum and Trumpet toward Cominius and Caius
Martius, enters with a Lieutenant, other Soldiers,
and a Scout.

LARTIUS
So, let the ports be guarded. Keep your duties
As I have set them down. If I do send, dispatch
Those centuries to our aid; the rest will serve
For a short holding. If we lose the field,
We cannot keep the town.
LIEUTENANT  Fear not our care, sir.
LARTIUS  Hence, and shut your gates upon ’s.
(To the Scout.) Our guider, come. To th’ Roman
camp conduct us.
They exit, the Lieutenant one way, Lartius another.

Scene 8
Alarum, as in battle.
Enter Martius and Aufidius at several doors.

MARTIUS
I’ll fight with none but thee, for I do hate thee
Worse than a promise-breaker.
AUFIDIUS  We hate alike.
Not Afric owns a serpent I abhor
More than thy fame and envy. Fix thy foot.
MARTIUS
Let the first budger die the other’s slave,
And the gods doom him after!
AUFIDIUS  If I fly, Martius,
Hollo me like a hare.
MARTIUS  Within these three hours,
Tullus,
Alone I fought in your Corioles’ walls
And made what work I pleased. ’Tis not my blood
Wherein thou seest me masked. For thy revenge,
Wrench up thy power to th’ highest.
AUFIDIUS  Wert thou the
Hector
That was the whip of your bragged progeny,
Thou shouldst not scape me here.

Here they fight, and certain Volsces come in
the aid of Aufidius.
(To the Volsces.) Officious and not valiant, you have
shamed me
In your condemnèd seconds.
Martius fights till they be driven in breathless.
Aufidius and Martius exit, separately.

Scene 9
Alarum. A retreat is sounded. Flourish. Enter, at one
door, Cominius with the Romans; at another door
Martius, with his arm in a scarf.

COMINIUS, to Martius
If I should tell thee o’er this thy day’s work,
Thou ’t not believe thy deeds. But I’ll report it
Where senators shall mingle tears with smiles;
Where great patricians shall attend and shrug,
I’ th’ end admire; where ladies shall be frighted
And, gladly quaked, hear more; where the dull
tribunes,
That with the fusty plebeians hate thine honors,
Shall say against their hearts “We thank the gods
Our Rome hath such a soldier.”
Yet cam’st thou to a morsel of this feast,
Having fully dined before.

Enter Titus Lartius with his power, from the pursuit.

LARTIUS  O general,
Here is the steed, we the caparison.
Hadst thou beheld—
MARTIUS  Pray now, no more. My mother,
Who has a charter to extol her blood,
When she does praise me grieves me. I have done
As you have done—that’s what I can;
Induced as you have been—that’s for my country.
He that has but effected his good will
Hath overta’en mine act.
COMINIUS  You shall not be
The grave of your deserving. Rome must know
The value of her own. ’Twere a concealment
Worse than a theft, no less than a traducement,
To hide your doings and to silence that
Which, to the spire and top of praises vouched,
Would seem but modest. Therefore, I beseech you—
In sign of what you are, not to reward
What you have done—before our army hear me.
MARTIUS
I have some wounds upon me, and they smart
To hear themselves remembered.
COMINIUS  Should they not,
Well might they fester ’gainst ingratitude
And tent themselves with death. Of all the horses—
Whereof we have ta’en good and good store—of all
The treasure in this field achieved and city,
We render you the tenth, to be ta’en forth
Before the common distribution
At your only choice.
MARTIUS  I thank you, general,
But cannot make my heart consent to take
A bribe to pay my sword. I do refuse it
And stand upon my common part with those
That have beheld the doing.
A long flourish. They all cry “Martius, Martius!”
and cast up their caps and lances.
Cominius and Lartius stand bare.
May these same instruments, which you profane,
Never sound more! When drums and trumpets shall
I’ th’ field prove flatterers, let courts and cities be
Made all of false-faced soothing! When steel grows
Soft as the parasite’s silk, let him be made
An ovator for th’ wars! No more, I say.
For that I have not washed my nose that bled,
Or foiled some debile wretch—which, without note,
Here’s many else have done—you shout me forth
In acclamations hyperbolical,
As if I loved my little should be dieted
In praises sauced with lies.
COMINIUS  Too modest are you,
More cruel to your good report than grateful
To us that give you truly. By your patience,
If ’gainst yourself you be incensed, we’ll put you,
Like one that means his proper harm, in manacles,
Then reason safely with you. Therefore be it known,
As to us to all the world, that Caius Martius
Wears this war’s garland, in token of the which
My noble steed, known to the camp, I give him,
With all his trim belonging. And from this time,
For what he did before Corioles, call him,
With all th’ applause and clamor of the host,
Martius Caius Coriolanus! Bear
Th’ addition nobly ever!

Flourish. Trumpets sound, and drums.

ALL
Martius Caius Coriolanus!
CORIOLANUS  I will go wash;
And when my face is fair, you shall perceive
Whether I blush or no. Howbeit, I thank you.
I mean to stride your steed and at all times
To undercrest your good addition
To th’ fairness of my power.
COMINIUS  So, to our tent,
Where, ere we do repose us, we will write
To Rome of our success.—You, Titus Lartius,
Must to Corioles back. Send us to Rome
The best, with whom we may articulate
For their own good and ours.
LARTIUS  I shall, my lord.
CORIOLANUS
The gods begin to mock me. I, that now
Refused most princely gifts, am bound to beg
Of my lord general.
COMINIUS  Take ’t, ’tis yours. What is ’t?
CORIOLANUS
I sometime lay here in Corioles
At a poor man’s house; he used me kindly.
He cried to me; I saw him prisoner;
But then Aufidius was within my view,
And wrath o’erwhelmed my pity. I request you
To give my poor host freedom.
COMINIUS  O, well begged!
Were he the butcher of my son, he should
Be free as is the wind.—Deliver him, Titus.
LARTIUS
Martius, his name?
CORIOLANUS  By Jupiter, forgot!
I am weary; yea, my memory is tired.
Have we no wine here?
COMINIUS  Go we to our tent.
The blood upon your visage dries; ’tis time
It should be looked to. Come.
A flourish of cornets. They exit.

Scene 10
Enter Tullus Aufidius bloody, with two or three Soldiers.

AUFIDIUS  The town is ta’en.
SOLDIER
’Twill be delivered back on good condition.
AUFIDIUS  Condition?
I would I were a Roman, for I cannot,
Being a Volsce, be that I am. Condition?
What good condition can a treaty find
I’ th’ part that is at mercy? Five times, Martius,
I have fought with thee; so often hast thou beat me
And wouldst do so, I think, should we encounter
As often as we eat. By th’ elements,
If e’er again I meet him beard to beard,
He’s mine, or I am his. Mine emulation
Hath not that honor in ’t it had; for where
I thought to crush him in an equal force,
True sword to sword, I’ll potch at him some way
Or wrath or craft may get him.
SOLDIER  He’s the devil.
AUFIDIUS
Bolder, though not so subtle. My valor’s poisoned
With only suff’ring stain by him; for him
Shall fly out of itself. Nor sleep nor sanctuary,
Being naked, sick, nor fane nor Capitol,
The prayers of priests nor times of sacrifice,
Embarquements all of fury, shall lift up
Their rotten privilege and custom ’gainst
My hate to Martius. Where I find him, were it
At home, upon my brother’s guard, even there,
Against the hospitable canon, would I
Wash my fierce hand in ’s heart. Go you to th’ city;
Learn how ’tis held and what they are that must
Be hostages for Rome.
SOLDIER  Will not you go?
AUFIDIUS
I am attended at the cypress grove. I pray you—
’Tis south the city mills—bring me word thither
How the world goes, that to the pace of it
I may spur on my journey.
SOLDIER  I shall, sir.
They exit, Aufidius through one door,
Soldiers through another.


 

ACT 2

Scene 1
Enter Menenius with the two Tribunes of the people,
Sicinius and Brutus.

MENENIUS  The augurer tells me we shall have news
tonight.
BRUTUS  Good or bad?
MENENIUS  Not according to the prayer of the people,
for they love not Martius.
SICINIUS  Nature teaches beasts to know their friends.
MENENIUS  Pray you, who does the wolf love?
SICINIUS  The lamb.
MENENIUS  Ay, to devour him, as the hungry plebeians
would the noble Martius.
BRUTUS  He’s a lamb indeed, that baas like a bear.
MENENIUS  He’s a bear indeed, that lives like a lamb.
You two are old men; tell me one thing that I shall
ask you.
BOTH  Well, sir.
MENENIUS  In what enormity is Martius poor in, that
you two have not in abundance?
BRUTUS  He’s poor in no one fault, but stored with all.
SICINIUS  Especially in pride.
BRUTUS  And topping all others in boasting.
MENENIUS  This is strange now. Do you two know how
you are censured here in the city, I mean of us o’
th’ right-hand file, do you?
BOTH  Why, how are we censured?
MENENIUS  Because you talk of pride now, will you not
be angry?
BOTH  Well, well, sir, well?
MENENIUS  Why, ’tis no great matter; for a very little
thief of occasion will rob you of a great deal of patience.
Give your dispositions the reins, and be
angry at your pleasures, at the least, if you take it
as a pleasure to you in being so. You blame Martius
for being proud.
BRUTUS  We do it not alone, sir.
MENENIUS  I know you can do very little alone, for
your helps are many, or else your actions would
grow wondrous single. Your abilities are too infantlike
for doing much alone. You talk of pride. O,
that you could turn your eyes toward the napes
of your necks and make but an interior survey of
your good selves! O, that you could!
BOTH  What then, sir?
MENENIUS  Why, then you should discover a brace of
unmeriting, proud, violent, testy magistrates, alias
fools, as any in Rome.
SICINIUS  Menenius, you are known well enough, too.
MENENIUS  I am known to be a humorous patrician and
one that loves a cup of hot wine with not a drop of
allaying Tiber in ’t; said to be something imperfect
in favoring the first complaint, hasty and tinder-like
upon too trivial motion; one that converses
more with the buttock of the night than with the
forehead of the morning. What I think I utter,
and spend my malice in my breath. Meeting two
such wealsmen as you are—I cannot call you
Lycurguses—if the drink you give me touch my
palate adversely, I make a crooked face at it. I cannot
say your Worships have delivered the matter
well when I find the ass in compound with the
major part of your syllables. And though I must
be content to bear with those that say you are reverend
grave men, yet they lie deadly that tell you
have good faces. If you see this in the map of my
microcosm, follows it that I am known well enough
too? What harm can your bisson conspectuities
glean out of this character, if I be known well
enough, too?
BRUTUS  Come, sir, come; we know you well enough.
MENENIUS  You know neither me, yourselves, nor anything.
You are ambitious for poor knaves’ caps
and legs. You wear out a good wholesome forenoon
in hearing a cause between an orange-wife
and a faucet-seller, and then rejourn the controversy
of threepence to a second day of audience.
When you are hearing a matter between party and
party, if you chance to be pinched with the colic,
you make faces like mummers, set up the bloody
flag against all patience, and, in roaring for a
chamber pot, dismiss the controversy bleeding,
the more entangled by your hearing. All the peace
you make in their cause is calling both the parties
knaves. You are a pair of strange ones.
BRUTUS  Come, come. You are well understood to be a
perfecter giber for the table than a necessary
bencher in the Capitol.
MENENIUS  Our very priests must become mockers if
they shall encounter such ridiculous subjects as
you are. When you speak best unto the purpose, it
is not worth the wagging of your beards, and your
beards deserve not so honorable a grave as to
stuff a botcher’s cushion or to be entombed in an
ass’s packsaddle. Yet you must be saying Martius is
proud, who, in a cheap estimation, is worth all
your predecessors since Deucalion, though peradventure
some of the best of ’em were hereditary
hangmen. Good e’en to your Worships. More of
your conversation would infect my brain, being
the herdsmen of the beastly plebeians. I will be
bold to take my leave of you.
He begins to exit. Brutus and Sicinius stand aside.

Enter Volumnia, Virgilia, and Valeria.

How now, my as fair as noble ladies—and the
moon, were she earthly, no nobler—whither do
you follow your eyes so fast?
VOLUMNIA  Honorable Menenius, my boy Martius approaches.
For the love of Juno, let’s go!
MENENIUS  Ha? Martius coming home?
VOLUMNIA  Ay, worthy Menenius, and with most prosperous
approbation.
MENENIUS  Take my cap, Jupiter, and I thank thee! (He
throws his cap in the air.) Hoo! Martius coming
home?
VALERIA, VIRGILIA  Nay, ’tis true.
VOLUMNIA  Look, here’s a letter from him. She produces
a paper. The state hath another, his wife another,
and I think there’s one at home for you.
MENENIUS  I will make my very house reel tonight. A
letter for me?
VIRGILIA  Yes, certain, there’s a letter for you; I saw ’t.
MENENIUS  A letter for me? It gives me an estate of
seven years’ health, in which time I will make a lip
at the physician. The most sovereign prescription
in Galen is but empiricutic and, to this preservative,
of no better report than a horse drench. Is he not
wounded? He was wont to come home wounded.
VIRGILIA  O no, no, no!
VOLUMNIA  O, he is wounded, I thank the gods for ’t.
MENENIUS  So do I too, if it be not too much. Brings he
victory in his pocket, the wounds become him.
VOLUMNIA  On ’s brows, Menenius. He comes the third
time home with the oaken garland.
MENENIUS  Has he disciplined Aufidius soundly?
VOLUMNIA  Titus Lartius writes they fought together,
but Aufidius got off.
MENENIUS  And ’twas time for him too, I’ll warrant him
that. An he had stayed by him, I would not have
been so ’fidiused for all the chests in Corioles and
the gold that’s in them. Is the Senate possessed of
this?
VOLUMNIA  Good ladies, let’s go.—Yes, yes, yes. The
Senate has letters from the General, wherein he
gives my son the whole name of the war. He hath
in this action outdone his former deeds doubly.
VALERIA  In troth, there’s wondrous things spoke of
him.
MENENIUS  Wondrous? Ay, I warrant you, and not without
his true purchasing.
VIRGILIA  The gods grant them true.
VOLUMNIA  True? Pow waw!
MENENIUS  True? I’ll be sworn they are true. Where is
he wounded? (To the Tribunes.) God save your
good Worships! Martius is coming home; he has
more cause to be proud.—Where is he wounded?
VOLUMNIA  I’ th’ shoulder and i’ th’ left arm. There will
be large cicatrices to show the people when he
shall stand for his place. He received in the repulse
of Tarquin seven hurts i’ th’ body.
MENENIUS  One i’ th’ neck and two i’ th’ thigh—there’s
nine that I know.
VOLUMNIA  He had, before this last expedition, twenty-five
wounds upon him.
MENENIUS  Now it’s twenty-seven. Every gash was an
enemy’s grave. (A shout and flourish.) Hark, the
trumpets!
VOLUMNIA  These are the ushers of Martius: before him
he carries noise, and behind him he leaves tears.
Death, that dark spirit, in ’s nervy arm doth lie,
Which, being advanced, declines, and then men die.
A sennet.

Enter Cominius the General and Titus Lartius, between
them Coriolanus crowned with an oaken garland, with
Captains and Soldiers and a Herald. Trumpets sound.

HERALD
Know, Rome, that all alone Martius did fight
Within Corioles’ gates, where he hath won,
With fame, a name to Martius Caius; these
In honor follows “Coriolanus.”
Welcome to Rome, renownèd Coriolanus.
Sound flourish.
ALL
Welcome to Rome, renownèd Coriolanus!
CORIOLANUS
No more of this. It does offend my heart.
Pray now, no more.
COMINIUS  Look, sir, your mother.
CORIOLANUS  O,
You have, I know, petitioned all the gods
For my prosperity.	Kneels.
VOLUMNIA  Nay, my good soldier, up.
He stands.
My gentle Martius, worthy Caius, and
By deed-achieving honor newly named—
What is it? Coriolanus must I call thee?
But, O, thy wife—
CORIOLANUS  My gracious silence, hail.
Wouldst thou have laughed had I come coffined
home,
That weep’st to see me triumph? Ah, my dear,
Such eyes the widows in Corioles wear
And mothers that lack sons.
MENENIUS  Now the gods crown
thee!
CORIOLANUS
And live you yet? (To Valeria.) O, my sweet lady,
pardon.
VOLUMNIA
I know not where to turn. O, welcome home!—
And, welcome, general.—And you’re welcome all.
MENENIUS
A hundred thousand welcomes! I could weep,
And I could laugh; I am light and heavy. Welcome.
A curse begin at very root on ’s heart
That is not glad to see thee! You are three
That Rome should dote on; yet, by the faith of men,
We have some old crab trees here at home that will
not
Be grafted to your relish. Yet welcome, warriors!
We call a nettle but a nettle, and
The faults of fools but folly.
COMINIUS  Ever right.
CORIOLANUS  Menenius ever, ever.
HERALD
Give way there, and go on!
CORIOLANUS, to Volumnia and Virgilia  Your hand
and yours.
Ere in our own house I do shade my head,
The good patricians must be visited,
From whom I have received not only greetings,
But with them change of honors.
VOLUMNIA  I have lived
To see inherited my very wishes
And the buildings of my fancy. Only
There’s one thing wanting, which I doubt not but
Our Rome will cast upon thee.
CORIOLANUS  Know, good mother,
I had rather be their servant in my way
Than sway with them in theirs.
COMINIUS  On, to the Capitol.
Flourish of cornets. They exit in state, as before.

Brutus and Sicinius come forward.

BRUTUS
All tongues speak of him, and the blearèd sights
Are spectacled to see him. Your prattling nurse
Into a rapture lets her baby cry
While she chats him. The kitchen malkin pins
Her richest lockram ’bout her reechy neck,
Clamb’ring the walls to eye him. Stalls, bulks,
windows
Are smothered up, leads filled, and ridges horsed
With variable complexions, all agreeing
In earnestness to see him. Seld-shown flamens
Do press among the popular throngs and puff
To win a vulgar station. Our veiled dames
Commit the war of white and damask in
Their nicely-gauded cheeks to th’ wanton spoil
Of Phoebus’ burning kisses. Such a pother,
As if that whatsoever god who leads him
Were slyly crept into his human powers
And gave him graceful posture.
SICINIUS  On the sudden
I warrant him consul.
BRUTUS  Then our office may,
During his power, go sleep.
SICINIUS
He cannot temp’rately transport his honors
From where he should begin and end, but will
Lose those he hath won.
BRUTUS  In that there’s comfort.
SICINIUS  Doubt
not
The commoners, for whom we stand, but they
Upon their ancient malice will forget
With the least cause these his new honors—which
That he will give them make I as little question
As he is proud to do ’t.
BRUTUS  I heard him swear,
Were he to stand for consul, never would he
Appear i’ th’ marketplace nor on him put
The napless vesture of humility,
Nor showing, as the manner is, his wounds
To th’ people, beg their stinking breaths.
SICINIUS  ’Tis right.
BRUTUS
It was his word. O, he would miss it rather
Than carry it but by the suit of the gentry to him
And the desire of the nobles.
SICINIUS  I wish no better
Than have him hold that purpose and to put it
In execution.
BRUTUS  ’Tis most like he will.
SICINIUS
It shall be to him then as our good wills,
A sure destruction.
BRUTUS  So it must fall out
To him, or our authority’s for an end.
We must suggest the people in what hatred
He still hath held them; that to ’s power he would
Have made them mules, silenced their pleaders, and
Dispropertied their freedoms; holding them
In human action and capacity
Of no more soul nor fitness for the world
Than camels in their war, who have their provand
Only for bearing burdens, and sore blows
For sinking under them.
SICINIUS  This, as you say, suggested
At some time when his soaring insolence
Shall touch the people—which time shall not want
If he be put upon ’t, and that’s as easy
As to set dogs on sheep—will be his fire
To kindle their dry stubble, and their blaze
Shall darken him forever.

Enter a Messenger.

BRUTUS  What’s the matter?
MESSENGER
You are sent for to the Capitol. ’Tis thought
That Martius shall be consul. I have seen
The dumb men throng to see him, and the blind
To hear him speak; matrons flung gloves,
Ladies and maids their scarves and handkerchiefs,
Upon him as he passed; the nobles bended
As to Jove’s statue, and the Commons made
A shower and thunder with their caps and shouts.
I never saw the like.
BRUTUS  Let’s to the Capitol,
And carry with us ears and eyes for th’ time,
But hearts for the event.
SICINIUS  Have with you.
They exit.

Scene 2
Enter two Officers, to lay cushions, as it were
in the Capitol.

FIRST OFFICER  Come, come. They are almost here. How
many stand for consulships?
SECOND OFFICER  Three, they say; but ’tis thought of
everyone Coriolanus will carry it.
FIRST OFFICER  That’s a brave fellow, but he’s vengeance
proud and loves not the common people.
SECOND OFFICER  ’Faith, there hath been many great
men that have flattered the people who ne’er loved
them; and there be many that they have loved they
know not wherefore; so that, if they love they
know not why, they hate upon no better a ground.
Therefore, for Coriolanus neither to care whether
they love or hate him manifests the true knowledge
he has in their disposition and, out of his noble
carelessness, lets them plainly see ’t.
FIRST OFFICER  If he did not care whether he had their
love or no, he waved indifferently ’twixt doing them
neither good nor harm; but he seeks their hate with
greater devotion than they can render it him and
leaves nothing undone that may fully discover him
their opposite. Now, to seem to affect the malice
and displeasure of the people is as bad as that
which he dislikes, to flatter them for their love.
SECOND OFFICER  He hath deserved worthily of his
country, and his ascent is not by such easy degrees
as those who, having been supple and courteous to
the people, bonneted, without any further deed to
have them at all into their estimation and report;
but he hath so planted his honors in their eyes and
his actions in their hearts that for their tongues to
be silent and not confess so much were a kind of
ingrateful injury. To report otherwise were a malice
that, giving itself the lie, would pluck reproof
and rebuke from every ear that heard it.
FIRST OFFICER  No more of him; he’s a worthy man.
Make way. They are coming.

A sennet. Enter the Patricians and the Tribunes of the
people, Lictors before them; Coriolanus, Menenius,
Cominius the consul. The Patricians sit. Sicinius
and Brutus take their places by themselves.
Coriolanus stands.

MENENIUS
Having determined of the Volsces and
To send for Titus Lartius, it remains,
As the main point of this our after-meeting,
To gratify his noble service that
Hath thus stood for his country. Therefore please
you,
Most reverend and grave elders, to desire
The present consul and last general
In our well-found successes to report
A little of that worthy work performed
By Martius Caius Coriolanus, whom
We met here both to thank and to remember
With honors like himself.	Coriolanus sits.
FIRST SENATOR  Speak, good Cominius.
Leave nothing out for length, and make us think
Rather our state’s defective for requital,
Than we to stretch it out. (To the Tribunes.)
Masters o’ th’ people,
We do request your kindest ears and, after,
Your loving motion toward the common body
To yield what passes here.
SICINIUS  We are convented
Upon a pleasing treaty and have hearts
Inclinable to honor and advance
The theme of our assembly.
BRUTUS  Which the rather
We shall be blest to do if he remember
A kinder value of the people than
He hath hereto prized them at.
MENENIUS  That’s off, that’s off!
I would you rather had been silent. Please you
To hear Cominius speak?
BRUTUS  Most willingly,
But yet my caution was more pertinent
Than the rebuke you give it.
MENENIUS  He loves your people,
But tie him not to be their bedfellow.—
Worthy Cominius, speak.
Coriolanus rises and offers to go away.
Nay, keep your place.
FIRST SENATOR
Sit, Coriolanus. Never shame to hear
What you have nobly done.
CORIOLANUS  Your Honors, pardon.
I had rather have my wounds to heal again
Than hear say how I got them.
BRUTUS  Sir, I hope
My words disbenched you not?
CORIOLANUS  No, sir. Yet oft,
When blows have made me stay, I fled from words.
You soothed not, therefore hurt not; but your
people,
I love them as they weigh.
MENENIUS  Pray now, sit down.
CORIOLANUS
I had rather have one scratch my head i’ th’ sun
When the alarum were struck than idly sit
To hear my nothings monstered.	Coriolanus exits.
MENENIUS  Masters of the people,
Your multiplying spawn how can he flatter—
That’s thousand to one good one—when you now
see
He had rather venture all his limbs for honor
Than one on ’s ears to hear it.—Proceed, Cominius.
COMINIUS
I shall lack voice. The deeds of Coriolanus
Should not be uttered feebly. It is held
That valor is the chiefest virtue and
Most dignifies the haver; if it be,
The man I speak of cannot in the world
Be singly counterpoised. At sixteen years,
When Tarquin made a head for Rome, he fought
Beyond the mark of others. Our then dictator,
Whom with all praise I point at, saw him fight
When with his Amazonian chin he drove
The bristled lips before him. He bestrid
An o’erpressed Roman and i’ th’ Consul’s view
Slew three opposers. Tarquin’s self he met
And struck him on his knee. In that day’s feats,
When he might act the woman in the scene,
He proved best man i’ th’ field and for his meed
Was brow-bound with the oak. His pupil age
Man-entered thus, he waxèd like a sea,
And in the brunt of seventeen battles since
He lurched all swords of the garland. For this last,
Before and in Corioles, let me say,
I cannot speak him home. He stopped the flyers
And by his rare example made the coward
Turn terror into sport. As weeds before
A vessel under sail, so men obeyed
And fell below his stem. His sword, Death’s stamp,
Where it did mark, it took; from face to foot
He was a thing of blood, whose every motion
Was timed with dying cries. Alone he entered
The mortal gate o’ th’ city, which he painted
With shunless destiny; aidless came off
And with a sudden reinforcement struck
Corioles like a planet. Now all’s his,
When by and by the din of war gan pierce
His ready sense; then straight his doubled spirit
Requickened what in flesh was fatigate,
And to the battle came he, where he did
Run reeking o’er the lives of men as if
’Twere a perpetual spoil; and till we called
Both field and city ours, he never stood
To ease his breast with panting.
MENENIUS  Worthy man!
FIRST SENATOR
He cannot but with measure fit the honors
Which we devise him.
COMINIUS  Our spoils he kicked at
And looked upon things precious as they were
The common muck of the world. He covets less
Than misery itself would give, rewards
His deeds with doing them, and is content
To spend the time to end it.
MENENIUS  He’s right noble.
Let him be called for.
FIRST SENATOR  Call Coriolanus.
OFFICER  He doth appear.

Enter Coriolanus.

MENENIUS
The Senate, Coriolanus, are well pleased
To make thee consul.
CORIOLANUS  I do owe them still
My life and services.
MENENIUS  It then remains
That you do speak to the people.
CORIOLANUS  I do beseech you,
Let me o’erleap that custom, for I cannot
Put on the gown, stand naked, and entreat them
For my wounds’ sake to give their suffrage. Please
you
That I may pass this doing.
SICINIUS  Sir, the people
Must have their voices; neither will they bate
One jot of ceremony.
MENENIUS, to Coriolanus  Put them not to ’t.
Pray you, go fit you to the custom, and
Take to you, as your predecessors have,
Your honor with your form.
CORIOLANUS  It is a part
That I shall blush in acting, and might well
Be taken from the people.
BRUTUS, to Sicinius  Mark you that?
CORIOLANUS
To brag unto them “Thus I did, and thus!”
Show them th’ unaching scars, which I should hide,
As if I had received them for the hire
Of their breath only!
MENENIUS  Do not stand upon ’t.—
We recommend to you, tribunes of the people,
Our purpose to them, and to our noble consul
Wish we all joy and honor.
SENATORS
To Coriolanus come all joy and honor!
Flourish cornets. Then they exit. Sicinius and
Brutus remain.
BRUTUS
You see how he intends to use the people.
SICINIUS
May they perceive ’s intent! He will require them
As if he did contemn what he requested
Should be in them to give.
BRUTUS  Come, we’ll inform them
Of our proceedings here. On th’ marketplace
I know they do attend us.
They exit.

Scene 3
Enter seven or eight Citizens.

FIRST CITIZEN  Once, if he do require our voices, we
ought not to deny him.
SECOND CITIZEN  We may, sir, if we will.
THIRD CITIZEN  We have power in ourselves to do it, but
it is a power that we have no power to do; for, if
he show us his wounds and tell us his deeds, we
are to put our tongues into those wounds and
speak for them. So, if he tell us his noble deeds, we
must also tell him our noble acceptance of them.
Ingratitude is monstrous, and for the multitude to
be ingrateful were to make a monster of the multitude,
of the which, we being members, should
bring ourselves to be monstrous members.
FIRST CITIZEN  And to make us no better thought of, a
little help will serve; for once we stood up about
the corn, he himself stuck not to call us the many-headed
multitude.
THIRD CITIZEN  We have been called so of many; not that
our heads are some brown, some black, some
abram, some bald, but that our wits are so diversely
colored; and truly I think if all our wits were to
issue out of one skull, they would fly east, west,
north, south, and their consent of one direct way
should be at once to all the points o’ th’ compass.
SECOND CITIZEN  Think you so? Which way do you
judge my wit would fly?
THIRD CITIZEN  Nay, your wit will not so soon out as another
man’s will; ’tis strongly wedged up in a blockhead.
But if it were at liberty, ’twould sure
southward.
SECOND CITIZEN  Why that way?
THIRD CITIZEN  To lose itself in a fog, where, being three
parts melted away with rotten dews, the fourth
would return for conscience’ sake, to help to get
thee a wife.
SECOND CITIZEN  You are never without your tricks. You
may, you may.
THIRD CITIZEN  Are you all resolved to give your voices?
But that’s no matter; the greater part carries it. I
say, if he would incline to the people, there was
never a worthier man.

Enter Coriolanus in a gown of humility, with Menenius.

Here he comes, and in the gown of humility. Mark
his behavior. We are not to stay all together, but to
come by him where he stands, by ones, by twos,
and by threes. He’s to make his requests by particulars,
wherein every one of us has a single honor
in giving him our own voices with our own tongues.
Therefore follow me, and I’ll direct you how you
shall go by him.
ALL  Content, content.	Citizens exit.
MENENIUS
O sir, you are not right. Have you not known
The worthiest men have done ’t?
CORIOLANUS  What must I say?
“I pray, sir?”—plague upon ’t! I cannot bring
My tongue to such a pace. “Look, sir, my wounds!
I got them in my country’s service when
Some certain of your brethren roared and ran
From th’ noise of our own drums.”
MENENIUS  O me, the gods!
You must not speak of that. You must desire them
To think upon you.
CORIOLANUS  Think upon me? Hang ’em!
I would they would forget me, like the virtues
Which our divines lose by ’em.
MENENIUS  You’ll mar all.
I’ll leave you. Pray you, speak to ’em, I pray you,
In wholesome manner.	He exits.
CORIOLANUS  Bid them wash their faces
And keep their teeth clean.

Enter three of the Citizens.

So, here comes a brace.—
You know the cause, sir, of my standing here.
THIRD CITIZEN
We do, sir. Tell us what hath brought you to ’t.
CORIOLANUS  Mine own desert.
SECOND CITIZEN  Your own desert?
CORIOLANUS  Ay, but not mine own desire.
THIRD CITIZEN  How, not your own desire?
CORIOLANUS  No, sir, ’twas never my desire yet to trouble
the poor with begging.
THIRD CITIZEN  You must think if we give you anything,
we hope to gain by you.
CORIOLANUS  Well then, I pray, your price o’ th’
consulship?
FIRST CITIZEN  The price is to ask it kindly.
CORIOLANUS  Kindly, sir, I pray, let me ha ’t. I have
wounds to show you, which shall be yours in
private.—Your good voice, sir. What say you?
SECOND CITIZEN  You shall ha ’t, worthy sir.
CORIOLANUS  A match, sir. There’s in all two worthy
voices begged. I have your alms. Adieu.
THIRD CITIZEN, to the other Citizens  But this is something
odd.
SECOND CITIZEN  An ’twere to give again—but ’tis no
matter.	These citizens exit.

Enter two other Citizens.

CORIOLANUS  Pray you now, if it may stand with the
tune of your voices that I may be consul, I have
here the customary gown.
FOURTH CITIZEN  You have deserved nobly of your
country, and you have not deserved nobly.
CORIOLANUS  Your enigma?
FOURTH CITIZEN  You have been a scourge to her enemies;
you have been a rod to her friends. You have
not indeed loved the common people.
CORIOLANUS  You should account me the more virtuous
that I have not been common in my love. I will, sir,
flatter my sworn brother, the people, to earn a
dearer estimation of them; ’tis a condition they account
gentle. And since the wisdom of their choice
is rather to have my hat than my heart, I will practice
the insinuating nod and be off to them most
counterfeitly. That is, sir, I will counterfeit the bewitchment
of some popular man and give it bountiful
to the desirers. Therefore, beseech you, I may
be consul.
FIFTH CITIZEN  We hope to find you our friend, and
therefore give you our voices heartily.
FOURTH CITIZEN  You have received many wounds for
your country.
CORIOLANUS  I will not seal your knowledge with showing
them. I will make much of your voices and so
trouble you no farther.
BOTH  The gods give you joy, sir, heartily.
Citizens exit.
CORIOLANUS  Most sweet voices!
Better it is to die, better to starve,
Than crave the hire which first we do deserve.
Why in this woolvish toge should I stand here
To beg of Hob and Dick that does appear
Their needless vouches? Custom calls me to ’t.
What custom wills, in all things should we do ’t?
The dust on antique time would lie unswept
And mountainous error be too highly heaped
For truth to o’erpeer. Rather than fool it so,
Let the high office and the honor go
To one that would do thus. I am half through;
The one part suffered, the other will I do.

Enter three Citizens more.

Here come more voices.—
Your voices! For your voices I have fought;
Watched for your voices; for your voices bear
Of wounds two dozen odd. Battles thrice six
I have seen and heard of; for your voices have
Done many things, some less, some more. Your
voices!
Indeed, I would be consul.
SIXTH CITIZEN  He has done nobly, and cannot go
without any honest man’s voice.
SEVENTH CITIZEN  Therefore let him be consul. The
gods give him joy, and make him good friend to
the people!
ALL  Amen, amen. God save thee, noble consul.
Citizens exit.
CORIOLANUS  Worthy voices!

Enter Menenius, with Brutus and Sicinius.

MENENIUS
You have stood your limitation, and the Tribunes
Endue you with the people’s voice. Remains
That in th’ official marks invested, you
Anon do meet the Senate.
CORIOLANUS  Is this done?
SICINIUS
The custom of request you have discharged.
The people do admit you, and are summoned
To meet anon upon your approbation.
CORIOLANUS
Where? At the Senate House?
SICINIUS  There, Coriolanus.
CORIOLANUS
May I change these garments?
SICINIUS  You may, sir.
CORIOLANUS
That I’ll straight do and, knowing myself again,
Repair to th’ Senate House.
MENENIUS
I’ll keep you company.—Will you along?
BRUTUS
We stay here for the people.
SICINIUS  Fare you well.
Coriolanus and Menenius exit.
He has it now; and by his looks, methinks,
’Tis warm at ’s heart.
BRUTUS  With a proud heart he wore
His humble weeds. Will you dismiss the people?

Enter the Plebeians.

SICINIUS
How now, my masters, have you chose this man?
FIRST CITIZEN  He has our voices, sir.
BRUTUS
We pray the gods he may deserve your loves.
SECOND CITIZEN
Amen, sir. To my poor unworthy notice,
He mocked us when he begged our voices.
THIRD CITIZEN
Certainly, he flouted us downright.
FIRST CITIZEN
No, ’tis his kind of speech. He did not mock us.
SECOND CITIZEN
Not one amongst us, save yourself, but says
He used us scornfully. He should have showed us
His marks of merit, wounds received for ’s country.
SICINIUS  Why, so he did, I am sure.
ALL  No, no. No man saw ’em.
THIRD CITIZEN
He said he had wounds, which he could show in
private,
And with his hat, thus waving it in scorn,
“I would be consul,” says he. “Agèd custom,
But by your voices, will not so permit me;
Your voices therefore.” When we granted that,
Here was “I thank you for your voices. Thank you.
Your most sweet voices! Now you have left your
voices,
I have no further with you.” Was not this mockery?
SICINIUS
Why either were you ignorant to see ’t
Or, seeing it, of such childish friendliness
To yield your voices?
BRUTUS  Could you not have told him
As you were lessoned? When he had no power,
But was a petty servant to the state,
He was your enemy, ever spake against
Your liberties and the charters that you bear
I’ th’ body of the weal; and, now arriving
A place of potency and sway o’ th’ state,
If he should still malignantly remain
Fast foe to th’ plebeii, your voices might
Be curses to yourselves. You should have said
That as his worthy deeds did claim no less
Than what he stood for, so his gracious nature
Would think upon you for your voices, and
Translate his malice towards you into love,
Standing your friendly lord.
SICINIUS  Thus to have said,
As you were fore-advised, had touched his spirit
And tried his inclination; from him plucked
Either his gracious promise, which you might,
As cause had called you up, have held him to;
Or else it would have galled his surly nature,
Which easily endures not article
Tying him to aught. So putting him to rage,
You should have ta’en th’ advantage of his choler
And passed him unelected.
BRUTUS  Did you perceive
He did solicit you in free contempt
When he did need your loves, and do you think
That his contempt shall not be bruising to you
When he hath power to crush? Why, had your
bodies
No heart among you? Or had you tongues to cry
Against the rectorship of judgment?
SICINIUS
Have you ere now denied the asker? And now
Again, of him that did not ask but mock,
Bestow your sued-for tongues?
THIRD CITIZEN  He’s not confirmed.
We may deny him yet.
SECOND CITIZEN  And will deny him.
I’ll have five hundred voices of that sound.
FIRST CITIZEN
I twice five hundred, and their friends to piece ’em.
BRUTUS
Get you hence instantly, and tell those friends
They have chose a consul that will from them take
Their liberties, make them of no more voice
Than dogs that are as often beat for barking
As therefor kept to do so.
SICINIUS  Let them assemble
And, on a safer judgment, all revoke
Your ignorant election. Enforce his pride
And his old hate unto you. Besides, forget not
With what contempt he wore the humble weed,
How in his suit he scorned you; but your loves,
Thinking upon his services, took from you
Th’ apprehension of his present portance,
Which most gibingly, ungravely, he did fashion
After the inveterate hate he bears you.
BRUTUS  Lay
A fault on us, your tribunes, that we labored,
No impediment between, but that you must
Cast your election on him.
SICINIUS  Say you chose him
More after our commandment than as guided
By your own true affections, and that your minds,
Preoccupied with what you rather must do
Than what you should, made you against the grain
To voice him consul. Lay the fault on us.
BRUTUS
Ay, spare us not. Say we read lectures to you,
How youngly he began to serve his country,
How long continued, and what stock he springs of,
The noble house o’ th’ Martians, from whence came
That Ancus Martius, Numa’s daughter’s son,
Who after great Hostilius here was king,
Of the same house Publius and Quintus were,
That our best water brought by conduits hither;
And Censorinus, that was so surnamed,
And nobly namèd so, twice being censor,
Was his great ancestor.
SICINIUS  One thus descended,
That hath besides well in his person wrought
To be set high in place, we did commend
To your remembrances; but you have found,
Scaling his present bearing with his past,
That he’s your fixèd enemy, and revoke
Your sudden approbation.
BRUTUS  Say you ne’er had done ’t—
Harp on that still—but by our putting on.
And presently, when you have drawn your number,
Repair to th’ Capitol.
ALL  We will so. Almost all
Repent in their election.	Plebeians exit.
BRUTUS  Let them go on.
This mutiny were better put in hazard
Than stay, past doubt, for greater.
If, as his nature is, he fall in rage
With their refusal, both observe and answer
The vantage of his anger.
SICINIUS  To th’ Capitol, come.
We will be there before the stream o’ th’ people,
And this shall seem, as partly ’tis, their own,
Which we have goaded onward.
They exit.


 

ACT 3

Scene 1
Cornets. Enter Coriolanus, Menenius, all the Gentry,
Cominius, Titus Lartius, and other Senators.

CORIOLANUS
Tullus Aufidius then had made new head?
LARTIUS
He had, my lord, and that it was which caused
Our swifter composition.
CORIOLANUS
So then the Volsces stand but as at first,
Ready, when time shall prompt them, to make road
Upon ’s again.
COMINIUS  They are worn, lord consul, so,
That we shall hardly in our ages see
Their banners wave again.
CORIOLANUS  Saw you Aufidius?
LARTIUS
On safeguard he came to me, and did curse
Against the Volsces, for they had so vilely
Yielded the town. He is retired to Antium.
CORIOLANUS
Spoke he of me?
LARTIUS  He did, my lord.
CORIOLANUS  How? What?
LARTIUS
How often he had met you sword to sword;
That of all things upon the earth he hated
Your person most; that he would pawn his fortunes
To hopeless restitution, so he might
Be called your vanquisher.
CORIOLANUS  At Antium lives he?
LARTIUS  At Antium.
CORIOLANUS
I wish I had a cause to seek him there,
To oppose his hatred fully. Welcome home.

Enter Sicinius and Brutus.

Behold, these are the tribunes of the people,
The tongues o’ th’ common mouth. I do despise
them,
For they do prank them in authority
Against all noble sufferance.
SICINIUS  Pass no further.
CORIOLANUS  Ha? What is that?
BRUTUS
It will be dangerous to go on. No further.
CORIOLANUS  What makes this change?
MENENIUS  The matter?
COMINIUS
Hath he not passed the noble and the common?
BRUTUS
Cominius, no.
CORIOLANUS  Have I had children’s voices?
FIRST SENATOR
Tribunes, give way. He shall to th’ marketplace.
BRUTUS
The people are incensed against him.
SICINIUS  Stop,
Or all will fall in broil.
CORIOLANUS  Are these your herd?
Must these have voices, that can yield them now
And straight disclaim their tongues? What are your
offices?
You being their mouths, why rule you not their
teeth?
Have you not set them on?
MENENIUS  Be calm, be calm.
CORIOLANUS
It is a purposed thing, and grows by plot,
To curb the will of the nobility.
Suffer ’t, and live with such as cannot rule
Nor ever will be ruled.
BRUTUS  Call ’t not a plot.
The people cry you mocked them; and, of late,
When corn was given them gratis, you repined,
Scandaled the suppliants for the people, called them
Timepleasers, flatterers, foes to nobleness.
CORIOLANUS
Why, this was known before.
BRUTUS  Not to them all.
CORIOLANUS
Have you informed them sithence?
BRUTUS  How? I inform
them?
COMINIUS  You are like to do such business.
BRUTUS
Not unlike, each way, to better yours.
CORIOLANUS
Why then should I be consul? By yond clouds,
Let me deserve so ill as you, and make me
Your fellow tribune.
SICINIUS  You show too much of that
For which the people stir. If you will pass
To where you are bound, you must inquire your
way,
Which you are out of, with a gentler spirit,
Or never be so noble as a consul,
Nor yoke with him for tribune.
MENENIUS  Let’s be calm.
COMINIUS
The people are abused, set on. This palt’ring
Becomes not Rome, nor has Coriolanus
Deserved this so dishonored rub, laid falsely
I’ th’ plain way of his merit.
CORIOLANUS  Tell me of corn?
This was my speech, and I will speak ’t again.
MENENIUS
Not now, not now.
FIRST SENATOR  Not in this heat, sir, now.
CORIOLANUS  Now, as I live, I will.
My nobler friends, I crave their pardons. For
The mutable, rank-scented meiny, let them
Regard me, as I do not flatter, and
Therein behold themselves. I say again,
In soothing them, we nourish ’gainst our senate
The cockle of rebellion, insolence, sedition,
Which we ourselves have plowed for, sowed, and
scattered
By mingling them with us, the honored number,
Who lack not virtue, no, nor power, but that
Which they have given to beggars.
MENENIUS  Well, no more.
FIRST SENATOR
No more words, we beseech you.
CORIOLANUS  How? No more?
As for my country I have shed my blood,
Not fearing outward force, so shall my lungs
Coin words till their decay against those measles
Which we disdain should tetter us, yet sought
The very way to catch them.
BRUTUS  You speak o’ th’ people
As if you were a god to punish, not
A man of their infirmity.
SICINIUS  ’Twere well
We let the people know ’t.
MENENIUS  What, what? His choler?
CORIOLANUS  Choler?
Were I as patient as the midnight sleep,
By Jove, ’twould be my mind.
SICINIUS  It is a mind
That shall remain a poison where it is,
Not poison any further.
CORIOLANUS  “Shall remain”?
Hear you this Triton of the minnows? Mark you
His absolute “shall”?
COMINIUS  ’Twas from the canon.
CORIOLANUS  “Shall”?
O good but most unwise patricians, why,
You grave but reckless senators, have you thus
Given Hydra here to choose an officer,
That with his peremptory “shall,” being but
The horn and noise o’ th’ monster’s, wants not spirit
To say he’ll turn your current in a ditch
And make your channel his? If he have power,
Then vail your ignorance; if none, awake
Your dangerous lenity. If you are learned,
Be not as common fools; if you are not,
Let them have cushions by you. You are plebeians,
If they be senators; and they are no less
When, both your voices blended, the great’st taste
Most palates theirs. They choose their magistrate,
And such a one as he, who puts his “shall,”
His popular “shall,” against a graver bench
Than ever frowned in Greece. By Jove himself,
It makes the consuls base! And my soul aches
To know, when two authorities are up,
Neither supreme, how soon confusion
May enter ’twixt the gap of both and take
The one by th’ other.
COMINIUS  Well, on to th’ marketplace.
CORIOLANUS
Whoever gave that counsel to give forth
The corn o’ th’ storehouse gratis, as ’twas used
Sometime in Greece—
MENENIUS  Well, well, no more of that.
CORIOLANUS
Though there the people had more absolute power,
I say they nourished disobedience, fed
The ruin of the state.
BRUTUS  Why shall the people give
One that speaks thus their voice?
CORIOLANUS  I’ll give my reasons,
More worthier than their voices. They know the
corn
Was not our recompense, resting well assured
They ne’er did service for ’t. Being pressed to th’ war,
Even when the navel of the state was touched,
They would not thread the gates. This kind of
service
Did not deserve corn gratis. Being i’ th’ war,
Their mutinies and revolts, wherein they showed
Most valor, spoke not for them. Th’ accusation
Which they have often made against the Senate,
All cause unborn, could never be the native
Of our so frank donation. Well, what then?
How shall this bosom multiplied digest
The Senate’s courtesy? Let deeds express
What’s like to be their words: “We did request it;
We are the greater poll, and in true fear
They gave us our demands.” Thus we debase
The nature of our seats and make the rabble
Call our cares fears, which will in time
Break ope the locks o’ th’ Senate and bring in
The crows to peck the eagles.
MENENIUS  Come, enough.
BRUTUS
Enough, with over-measure.
CORIOLANUS  No, take more!
What may be sworn by, both divine and human,
Seal what I end withal! This double worship—
Where one part does disdain with cause, the other
Insult without all reason, where gentry, title,
wisdom
Cannot conclude but by the yea and no
Of general ignorance—it must omit
Real necessities and give way the while
To unstable slightness. Purpose so barred, it follows
Nothing is done to purpose. Therefore, beseech
you—
You that will be less fearful than discreet,
That love the fundamental part of state
More than you doubt the change on ’t, that prefer
A noble life before a long, and wish
To jump a body with a dangerous physic
That’s sure of death without it—at once pluck out
The multitudinous tongue; let them not lick
The sweet which is their poison. Your dishonor
Mangles true judgment and bereaves the state
Of that integrity which should become ’t,
Not having the power to do the good it would
For th’ ill which doth control ’t.
BRUTUS  ’Has said enough.
SICINIUS
’Has spoken like a traitor and shall answer
As traitors do.
CORIOLANUS  Thou wretch, despite o’erwhelm thee!
What should the people do with these bald tribunes,
On whom depending, their obedience fails
To th’ greater bench? In a rebellion,
When what’s not meet but what must be was law,
Then were they chosen. In a better hour,
Let what is meet be said it must be meet,
And throw their power i’ th’ dust.
BRUTUS  Manifest treason.
SICINIUS  This a consul? No.
BRUTUS  The aediles, ho! Let him be apprehended.

Enter an Aedile.

SICINIUS
Go, call the people; Aedile exits. in whose name
myself
Attach thee as a traitorous innovator,
A foe to th’ public weal. Obey, I charge thee,
And follow to thine answer.
CORIOLANUS  Hence, old goat.
ALL PATRICIANS
We’ll surety him.
COMINIUS, to Sicinius  Agèd sir, hands off.
CORIOLANUS, to Sicinius
Hence, rotten thing, or I shall shake thy bones
Out of thy garments.
SICINIUS  Help, you citizens!

Enter a rabble of Plebeians with the Aediles.

MENENIUS  On both sides more respect!
SICINIUS
Here’s he that would take from you all your power.
BRUTUS  Seize him, aediles.
ALL PLEBEIANS  Down with him, down with him!
SECOND SENATOR  Weapons, weapons, weapons!
They all bustle about Coriolanus.
Tribunes, patricians, citizens, what ho!
Sicinius, Brutus, Coriolanus, citizens!
ALL  Peace, peace, peace! Stay, hold, peace!
MENENIUS
What is about to be? I am out of breath.
Confusion’s near. I cannot speak. You, tribunes
To th’ people!—Coriolanus, patience!—
Speak, good Sicinius.
SICINIUS  Hear me, people! Peace!
ALL PLEBEIANS
Let’s hear our tribune. Peace! Speak, speak, speak.
SICINIUS
You are at point to lose your liberties.
Martius would have all from you, Martius,
Whom late you have named for consul.
MENENIUS  Fie, fie, fie!
This is the way to kindle, not to quench.
FIRST SENATOR
To unbuild the city and to lay all flat.
SICINIUS
What is the city but the people?
ALL PLEBEIANS  True,
The people are the city.
BRUTUS
By the consent of all, we were established
The people’s magistrates.
ALL PLEBEIANS  You so remain.
MENENIUS  And so are like to do.
CORIOLANUS
That is the way to lay the city flat,
To bring the roof to the foundation
And bury all which yet distinctly ranges
In heaps and piles of ruin.
SICINIUS  This deserves death.
BRUTUS
Or let us stand to our authority
Or let us lose it. We do here pronounce,
Upon the part o’ th’ people, in whose power
We were elected theirs, Martius is worthy
Of present death.
SICINIUS  Therefore lay hold of him,
Bear him to th’ rock Tarpeian, and from thence
Into destruction cast him.
BRUTUS  Aediles, seize him!
ALL PLEBEIANS
Yield, Martius, yield!
MENENIUS  Hear me one word.
Beseech you, tribunes, hear me but a word.
AEDILES  Peace, peace!
MENENIUS
Be that you seem, truly your country’s friend,
And temp’rately proceed to what you would
Thus violently redress.
BRUTUS  Sir, those cold ways,
That seem like prudent helps, are very poisonous
Where the disease is violent.—Lay hands upon him,
And bear him to the rock.
Coriolanus draws his sword.
CORIOLANUS  No, I’ll die here.
There’s some among you have beheld me fighting.
Come, try upon yourselves what you have seen me.
MENENIUS
Down with that sword!—Tribunes, withdraw awhile.
BRUTUS
Lay hands upon him!
MENENIUS  Help Martius, help!
You that be noble, help him, young and old!
ALL PLEBEIANS  Down with him, down with him!

In this mutiny, the Tribunes, the Aediles, and the People
are beat in.

MENENIUS, to Coriolanus
Go, get you to your house. Begone, away.
All will be naught else.
SECOND SENATOR  Get you gone.
CORIOLANUS  Stand fast!
We have as many friends as enemies.
MENENIUS
Shall it be put to that?
FIRST SENATOR  The gods forbid!—
I prithee, noble friend, home to thy house;
Leave us to cure this cause.
MENENIUS  For ’tis a sore upon us
You cannot tent yourself. Begone, beseech you.
COMINIUS  Come, sir, along with us.
CORIOLANUS
I would they were barbarians, as they are,
Though in Rome littered; not Romans, as they are
not,
Though calved i’ th’ porch o’ th’ Capitol.
MENENIUS  Begone!
Put not your worthy rage into your tongue.
One time will owe another.
CORIOLANUS  On fair ground
I could beat forty of them.
MENENIUS  I could myself
Take up a brace o’ th’ best of them, yea, the two
tribunes.
COMINIUS
But now ’tis odds beyond arithmetic,
And manhood is called foolery when it stands
Against a falling fabric. To Coriolanus. Will you
hence,
Before the tag return, whose rage doth rend
Like interrupted waters and o’erbear
What they are used to bear?
MENENIUS, to Coriolanus  Pray you, begone.
I’ll try whether my old wit be in request
With those that have but little. This must be patched
With cloth of any color.
COMINIUS  Nay, come away.
Coriolanus and Cominius exit.
PATRICIAN  This man has marred his fortune.
MENENIUS
His nature is too noble for the world.
He would not flatter Neptune for his trident
Or Jove for ’s power to thunder. His heart’s his
mouth;
What his breast forges, that his tongue must vent,
And, being angry, does forget that ever
He heard the name of death.	A noise within.
Here’s goodly work.
PATRICIAN  I would they were abed!
MENENIUS
I would they were in Tiber. What the vengeance,
Could he not speak ’em fair?

Enter Brutus and Sicinius with the rabble again.

SICINIUS  Where is this viper
That would depopulate the city and
Be every man himself?
MENENIUS  You worthy tribunes—
SICINIUS
He shall be thrown down the Tarpeian rock
With rigorous hands. He hath resisted law,
And therefore law shall scorn him further trial
Than the severity of the public power
Which he so sets at naught.
FIRST CITIZEN  He shall well know
The noble tribunes are the people’s mouths
And we their hands.
ALL PLEBEIANS  He shall, sure on ’t.
MENENIUS  Sir, sir—
SICINIUS  Peace!
MENENIUS
Do not cry havoc where you should but hunt
With modest warrant.
SICINIUS  Sir, how com’st that you
Have holp to make this rescue?
MENENIUS  Hear me speak.
As I do know the Consul’s worthiness,
So can I name his faults.
SICINIUS  Consul? What consul?
MENENIUS  The consul Coriolanus.
BRUTUS  He consul?
ALL PLEBEIANS  No, no, no, no, no!
MENENIUS
If, by the Tribunes’ leave, and yours, good people,
I may be heard, I would crave a word or two,
The which shall turn you to no further harm
Than so much loss of time.
SICINIUS  Speak briefly then,
For we are peremptory to dispatch
This viperous traitor. To eject him hence
Were but one danger, and to keep him here
Our certain death. Therefore it is decreed
He dies tonight.
MENENIUS  Now the good gods forbid
That our renownèd Rome, whose gratitude
Towards her deservèd children is enrolled
In Jove’s own book, like an unnatural dam
Should now eat up her own.
SICINIUS
He’s a disease that must be cut away.
MENENIUS
O, he’s a limb that has but a disease—
Mortal to cut it off; to cure it easy.
What has he done to Rome that’s worthy death?
Killing our enemies, the blood he hath lost—
Which I dare vouch is more than that he hath
By many an ounce—he dropped it for his country;
And what is left, to lose it by his country
Were to us all that do ’t and suffer it
A brand to th’ end o’ th’ world.
SICINIUS  This is clean cam.
BRUTUS
Merely awry. When he did love his country,
It honored him.
SICINIUS  The service of the foot,
Being once gangrened, is not then respected
For what before it was.
BRUTUS  We’ll hear no more.
Pursue him to his house, and pluck him thence,
Lest his infection, being of catching nature,
Spread further.
MENENIUS  One word more, one word!
This tiger-footed rage, when it shall find
The harm of unscanned swiftness, will too late
Tie leaden pounds to ’s heels. Proceed by process,
Lest parties—as he is beloved—break out
And sack great Rome with Romans.
BRUTUS  If it were so—
SICINIUS  What do you talk?
Have we not had a taste of his obedience?
Our aediles smote! Ourselves resisted! Come.
MENENIUS
Consider this: he has been bred i’ th’ wars
Since he could draw a sword, and is ill schooled
In bolted language; meal and bran together
He throws without distinction. Give me leave,
I’ll go to him and undertake to bring him
Where he shall answer by a lawful form,
In peace, to his utmost peril.
FIRST SENATOR  Noble tribunes,
It is the humane way: the other course
Will prove too bloody, and the end of it
Unknown to the beginning.
SICINIUS  Noble Menenius,
Be you then as the people’s officer.—
Masters, lay down your weapons.
BRUTUS  Go not home.
SICINIUS
Meet on the marketplace. To Menenius. We’ll
attend you there,
Where if you bring not Martius, we’ll proceed
In our first way.
MENENIUS  I’ll bring him to you.
To Senators. Let me desire your company. He must
come,
Or what is worst will follow.
FIRST SENATOR  Pray you, let’s to him.
All exit.

Scene 2
Enter Coriolanus with Nobles.

CORIOLANUS
Let them pull all about mine ears, present me
Death on the wheel or at wild horses’ heels,
Or pile ten hills on the Tarpeian rock,
That the precipitation might down stretch
Below the beam of sight, yet will I still
Be thus to them.
NOBLE  You do the nobler.
CORIOLANUS  I muse my mother
Does not approve me further, who was wont
To call them woolen vassals, things created
To buy and sell with groats, to show bare heads
In congregations, to yawn, be still, and wonder
When one but of my ordinance stood up
To speak of peace or war.

Enter Volumnia.

I talk of you.
Why did you wish me milder? Would you have me
False to my nature? Rather say I play
The man I am.
VOLUMNIA  O sir, sir, sir,
I would have had you put your power well on
Before you had worn it out.
CORIOLANUS  Let go.
VOLUMNIA
You might have been enough the man you are
With striving less to be so. Lesser had been
The thwartings of your dispositions if
You had not showed them how you were disposed
Ere they lacked power to cross you.
CORIOLANUS  Let them hang!
VOLUMNIA  Ay, and burn too.

Enter Menenius with the Senators.

MENENIUS, to Coriolanus
Come, come, you have been too rough, something
too rough.
You must return and mend it.
FIRST SENATOR  There’s no remedy,
Unless, by not so doing, our good city
Cleave in the midst and perish.
VOLUMNIA  Pray be counseled.
I have a heart as little apt as yours,
But yet a brain that leads my use of anger
To better vantage.
MENENIUS  Well said, noble woman.
Before he should thus stoop to th’ herd—but that
The violent fit o’ th’ time craves it as physic
For the whole state—I would put mine armor on,
Which I can scarcely bear.
CORIOLANUS  What must I do?
MENENIUS
Return to th’ Tribunes.
CORIOLANUS  Well, what then? What then?
MENENIUS  Repent what you have spoke.
CORIOLANUS
For them? I cannot do it to the gods.
Must I then do ’t to them?
VOLUMNIA  You are too absolute,
Though therein you can never be too noble
But when extremities speak. I have heard you say
Honor and policy, like unsevered friends,
I’ th’ war do grow together. Grant that, and tell me
In peace what each of them by th’ other lose
That they combine not there?
CORIOLANUS  Tush, tush!
MENENIUS  A good
demand.
VOLUMNIA
If it be honor in your wars to seem
The same you are not, which for your best ends
You adopt your policy, how is it less or worse
That it shall hold companionship in peace
With honor as in war, since that to both
It stands in like request?
CORIOLANUS  Why force you this?
VOLUMNIA
Because that now it lies you on to speak
To th’ people, not by your own instruction,
Nor by th’ matter which your heart prompts you,
But with such words that are but roted in
Your tongue, though but bastards and syllables
Of no allowance to your bosom’s truth.
Now, this no more dishonors you at all
Than to take in a town with gentle words,
Which else would put you to your fortune and
The hazard of much blood.
I would dissemble with my nature where
My fortunes and my friends at stake required
I should do so in honor. I am in this
Your wife, your son, these senators, the nobles;
And you will rather show our general louts
How you can frown than spend a fawn upon ’em
For the inheritance of their loves and safeguard
Of what that want might ruin.
MENENIUS  Noble lady!—
Come, go with us; speak fair. You may salve so,
Not what is dangerous present, but the loss
Of what is past.
VOLUMNIA  I prithee now, my son,
Go to them with this bonnet in thy hand,
And thus far having stretched it—here be with
them—
Thy knee bussing the stones—for in such business
Action is eloquence, and the eyes of th’ ignorant
More learnèd than the ears—waving thy head,
Which often thus correcting thy stout heart,
Now humble as the ripest mulberry
That will not hold the handling. Or say to them
Thou art their soldier and, being bred in broils,
Hast not the soft way, which thou dost confess
Were fit for thee to use as they to claim,
In asking their good loves; but thou wilt frame
Thyself, forsooth, hereafter theirs, so far
As thou hast power and person.
MENENIUS  This but done
Even as she speaks, why, their hearts were yours;
For they have pardons, being asked, as free
As words to little purpose.
VOLUMNIA  Prithee now,
Go, and be ruled; although I know thou hadst rather
Follow thine enemy in a fiery gulf
Than flatter him in a bower.

Enter Cominius.

Here is Cominius.
COMINIUS
I have been i’ th’ marketplace; and, sir, ’tis fit
You make strong party or defend yourself
By calmness or by absence. All’s in anger.
MENENIUS
Only fair speech.
COMINIUS  I think ’twill serve, if he
Can thereto frame his spirit.
VOLUMNIA  He must, and will.—
Prithee, now, say you will, and go about it.
CORIOLANUS
Must I go show them my unbarbèd sconce? Must I
With my base tongue give to my noble heart
A lie that it must bear? Well, I will do ’t.
Yet, were there but this single plot to lose,
This mold of Martius, they to dust should grind it
And throw ’t against the wind. To th’ marketplace!
You have put me now to such a part which never
I shall discharge to th’ life.
COMINIUS  Come, come, we’ll prompt
you.
VOLUMNIA
I prithee now, sweet son, as thou hast said
My praises made thee first a soldier, so,
To have my praise for this, perform a part
Thou hast not done before.
CORIOLANUS  Well, I must do ’t.
Away, my disposition, and possess me
Some harlot’s spirit! My throat of war be turned,
Which choirèd with my drum, into a pipe
Small as an eunuch or the virgin voice
That babies lull asleep! The smiles of knaves
Tent in my cheeks, and schoolboys’ tears take up
The glasses of my sight! A beggar’s tongue
Make motion through my lips, and my armed knees,
Who bowed but in my stirrup, bend like his
That hath received an alms. I will not do ’t,
Lest I surcease to honor mine own truth
And, by my body’s action, teach my mind
A most inherent baseness.
VOLUMNIA  At thy choice, then.
To beg of thee, it is my more dishonor
Than thou of them. Come all to ruin. Let
Thy mother rather feel thy pride than fear
Thy dangerous stoutness, for I mock at death
With as big heart as thou. Do as thou list.
Thy valiantness was mine; thou suck’st it from me,
But owe thy pride thyself.
CORIOLANUS  Pray be content.
Mother, I am going to the marketplace.
Chide me no more. I’ll mountebank their loves,
Cog their hearts from them, and come home
beloved
Of all the trades in Rome. Look, I am going.
Commend me to my wife. I’ll return consul,
Or never trust to what my tongue can do
I’ th’ way of flattery further.
VOLUMNIA  Do your will.
Volumnia exits.
COMINIUS
Away! The Tribunes do attend you. Arm yourself
To answer mildly, for they are prepared
With accusations, as I hear, more strong
Than are upon you yet.
CORIOLANUS
The word is “mildly.” Pray you, let us go.
Let them accuse me by invention, I
Will answer in mine honor.
MENENIUS  Ay, but mildly.
CORIOLANUS  Well, mildly be it, then. Mildly.
They exit.

Scene 3
Enter Sicinius and Brutus.

BRUTUS
In this point charge him home, that he affects
Tyrannical power. If he evade us there,
Enforce him with his envy to the people,
And that the spoil got on the Antiates
Was ne’er distributed.

Enter an Aedile.

What, will he come?
AEDILE  He’s coming.
BRUTUS  How accompanied?
AEDILE
With old Menenius, and those senators
That always favored him.
SICINIUS  Have you a catalogue
Of all the voices that we have procured,
Set down by th’ poll?
AEDILE  I have. ’Tis ready.
SICINIUS
Have you collected them by tribes?
AEDILE  I have.
SICINIUS
Assemble presently the people hither;
And when they hear me say “It shall be so
I’ th’ right and strength o’ th’ commons,” be it either
For death, for fine, or banishment, then let them
If I say “Fine,” cry “Fine,” if “Death,” cry “Death,”
Insisting on the old prerogative
And power i’ th’ truth o’ th’ cause.
AEDILE  I shall inform them.
BRUTUS
And when such time they have begun to cry,
Let them not cease, but with a din confused
Enforce the present execution
Of what we chance to sentence.
AEDILE  Very well.
SICINIUS
Make them be strong and ready for this hint
When we shall hap to give ’t them.
BRUTUS  Go about it.
Aedile exits.
Put him to choler straight. He hath been used
Ever to conquer and to have his worth
Of contradiction. Being once chafed, he cannot
Be reined again to temperance; then he speaks
What’s in his heart, and that is there which looks
With us to break his neck.

Enter Coriolanus, Menenius, and Cominius, with
others (Senators).

SICINIUS  Well, here he comes.
MENENIUS, aside to Coriolanus  Calmly, I do beseech
you.
CORIOLANUS, aside to Menenius
Ay, as an hostler that for th’ poorest piece
Will bear the knave by th’ volume.—Th’ honored
gods
Keep Rome in safety and the chairs of justice
Supplied with worthy men! Plant love among ’s!
Throng our large temples with the shows of peace
And not our streets with war!
FIRST SENATOR  Amen, amen.
MENENIUS  A noble wish.

Enter the Aedile with the Plebeians.

SICINIUS  Draw near, you people.
AEDILE
List to your tribunes. Audience! Peace, I say!
CORIOLANUS  First, hear me speak.
BOTH TRIBUNES  Well, say.—Peace, ho!
CORIOLANUS
Shall I be charged no further than this present?
Must all determine here?
SICINIUS  I do demand
If you submit you to the people’s voices,
Allow their officers, and are content
To suffer lawful censure for such faults
As shall be proved upon you.
CORIOLANUS  I am content.
MENENIUS
Lo, citizens, he says he is content.
The warlike service he has done, consider. Think
Upon the wounds his body bears, which show
Like graves i’ th’ holy churchyard.
CORIOLANUS  Scratches with
briars,
Scars to move laughter only.
MENENIUS  Consider further,
That when he speaks not like a citizen,
You find him like a soldier. Do not take
His rougher accents for malicious sounds,
But, as I say, such as become a soldier
Rather than envy you.
COMINIUS  Well, well, no more.
CORIOLANUS  What is the matter,
That, being passed for consul with full voice,
I am so dishonored that the very hour
You take it off again?
SICINIUS  Answer to us.
CORIOLANUS  Say then. ’Tis true, I ought so.
SICINIUS
We charge you that you have contrived to take
From Rome all seasoned office and to wind
Yourself into a power tyrannical,
For which you are a traitor to the people.
CORIOLANUS
How? Traitor?
MENENIUS  Nay, temperately! Your promise.
CORIOLANUS
The fires i’ th’ lowest hell fold in the people!
Call me their traitor? Thou injurious tribune!
Within thine eyes sat twenty thousand deaths,
In thy hands clutched as many millions, in
Thy lying tongue both numbers, I would say
“Thou liest” unto thee with a voice as free
As I do pray the gods.
SICINIUS  Mark you this, people?
ALL PLEBEIANS  To th’ rock, to th’ rock with him!
SICINIUS  Peace!
We need not put new matter to his charge.
What you have seen him do and heard him speak,
Beating your officers, cursing yourselves,
Opposing laws with strokes, and here defying
Those whose great power must try him—even this,
So criminal and in such capital kind,
Deserves th’ extremest death.
BRUTUS  But since he hath
Served well for Rome—
CORIOLANUS  What do you prate of service?
BRUTUS  I talk of that that know it.
CORIOLANUS  You?
MENENIUS
Is this the promise that you made your mother?
COMINIUS  Know, I pray you—
CORIOLANUS  I’ll know no further.
Let them pronounce the steep Tarpeian death,
Vagabond exile, flaying, pent to linger
But with a grain a day, I would not buy
Their mercy at the price of one fair word,
Nor check my courage for what they can give,
To have ’t with saying “Good morrow.”
SICINIUS  For that he has,
As much as in him lies, from time to time
Envied against the people, seeking means
To pluck away their power, as now at last
Given hostile strokes, and that not in the presence
Of dreaded justice, but on the ministers
That doth distribute it, in the name o’ th’ people
And in the power of us the Tribunes, we,
Even from this instant, banish him our city
In peril of precipitation
From off the rock Tarpeian, never more
To enter our Rome gates. I’ th’ people’s name,
I say it shall be so.
ALL PLEBEIANS
It shall be so, it shall be so! Let him away!
He’s banished, and it shall be so.
COMINIUS
Hear me, my masters and my common friends—
SICINIUS
He’s sentenced. No more hearing.
COMINIUS  Let me speak.
I have been consul and can show for Rome
Her enemies’ marks upon me. I do love
My country’s good with a respect more tender,
More holy and profound, than mine own life,
My dear wife’s estimate, her womb’s increase,
And treasure of my loins. Then if I would
Speak that—
SICINIUS  We know your drift. Speak what?
BRUTUS
There’s no more to be said, but he is banished
As enemy to the people and his country.
It shall be so.
ALL PLEBEIANS  It shall be so, it shall be so!
CORIOLANUS
You common cry of curs, whose breath I hate
As reek o’ th’ rotten fens, whose loves I prize
As the dead carcasses of unburied men
That do corrupt my air, I banish you!
And here remain with your uncertainty;
Let every feeble rumor shake your hearts;
Your enemies, with nodding of their plumes,
Fan you into despair! Have the power still
To banish your defenders, till at length
Your ignorance—which finds not till it feels,
Making but reservation of yourselves,
Still your own foes—deliver you
As most abated captives to some nation
That won you without blows! Despising
For you the city, thus I turn my back.
There is a world elsewhere.
Coriolanus, Cominius, with others (Senators) exit.
AEDILE
The people’s enemy is gone, is gone.
ALL PLEBEIANS
Our enemy is banished; he is gone. Hoo, hoo!
They all shout and throw up their caps.
SICINIUS
Go see him out at gates, and follow him,
As he hath followed you, with all despite.
Give him deserved vexation. Let a guard
Attend us through the city.
ALL PLEBEIANS
Come, come, let’s see him out at gates! Come!
The gods preserve our noble tribunes! Come!
They exit.


 

ACT 4

Scene 1
Enter Coriolanus, Volumnia, Virgilia, Menenius,
Cominius, with the young nobility of Rome.

CORIOLANUS
Come, leave your tears. A brief farewell. The beast
With many heads butts me away. Nay, mother,
Where is your ancient courage? You were used
To say extremities was the trier of spirits;
That common chances common men could bear;
That when the sea was calm, all boats alike
Showed mastership in floating; fortune’s blows
When most struck home, being gentle wounded
craves
A noble cunning. You were used to load me
With precepts that would make invincible
The heart that conned them.
VIRGILIA
O heavens! O heavens!
CORIOLANUS  Nay, I prithee,
woman—
VOLUMNIA
Now the red pestilence strike all trades in Rome,
And occupations perish!
CORIOLANUS  What, what, what!
I shall be loved when I am lacked. Nay, mother,
Resume that spirit when you were wont to say
If you had been the wife of Hercules,
Six of his labors you’d have done and saved
Your husband so much sweat.—Cominius,
Droop not. Adieu.—Farewell, my wife, my mother.
I’ll do well yet.—Thou old and true Menenius,
Thy tears are salter than a younger man’s
And venomous to thine eyes.—My sometime
general,
I have seen thee stern, and thou hast oft beheld
Heart-hard’ning spectacles. Tell these sad women
’Tis fond to wail inevitable strokes
As ’tis to laugh at ’em.—My mother, you wot well
My hazards still have been your solace, and—
Believe ’t not lightly—though I go alone,
Like to a lonely dragon that his fen
Makes feared and talked of more than seen, your
son
Will or exceed the common or be caught
With cautelous baits and practice.
VOLUMNIA  My first son,
Whither wilt thou go? Take good Cominius
With thee awhile. Determine on some course
More than a wild exposure to each chance
That starts i’ th’ way before thee.
VIRGILIA  O the gods!
COMINIUS
I’ll follow thee a month, devise with thee
Where thou shalt rest, that thou mayst hear of us
And we of thee; so if the time thrust forth
A cause for thy repeal, we shall not send
O’er the vast world to seek a single man
And lose advantage, which doth ever cool
I’ th’ absence of the needer.
CORIOLANUS  Fare you well.
Thou hast years upon thee, and thou art too full
Of the wars’ surfeits to go rove with one
That’s yet unbruised. Bring me but out at gate.—
Come, my sweet wife, my dearest mother, and
My friends of noble touch. When I am forth,
Bid me farewell, and smile. I pray you, come.
While I remain above the ground, you shall
Hear from me still, and never of me aught
But what is like me formerly.
MENENIUS  That’s worthily
As any ear can hear. Come, let’s not weep.
If I could shake off but one seven years
From these old arms and legs, by the good gods,
I’d with thee every foot.
CORIOLANUS  Give me thy hand.
Come.
They exit.

Scene 2
Enter the two Tribunes, Sicinius, and Brutus,
with the Aedile.

SICINIUS
Bid them all home. He’s gone, and we’ll no further.
The nobility are vexed, whom we see have sided
In his behalf.
BRUTUS  Now we have shown our power,
Let us seem humbler after it is done
Than when it was a-doing.
SICINIUS  Bid them home.
Say their great enemy is gone, and they
Stand in their ancient strength.
BRUTUS  Dismiss them home.
Aedile exits.
Here comes his mother.

Enter Volumnia, Virgilia, and Menenius.

SICINIUS  Let’s not meet her.
BRUTUS  Why?
SICINIUS  They say she’s mad.
BRUTUS
They have ta’en note of us. Keep on your way.
VOLUMNIA
O, you’re well met. The hoarded plague o’ th’ gods
Requite your love!
MENENIUS  Peace, peace! Be not so loud.
VOLUMNIA, to the Tribunes
If that I could for weeping, you should hear—
Nay, and you shall hear some. (To Sicinius.) Will
you be gone?
VIRGILIA, to Brutus
You shall stay too. I would I had the power
To say so to my husband.
SICINIUS, to Volumnia  Are you mankind?
VOLUMNIA
Ay, fool, is that a shame? Note but this, fool.
Was not a man my father? Hadst thou foxship
To banish him that struck more blows for Rome
Than thou hast spoken words?
SICINIUS  O blessèd heavens!
VOLUMNIA
More noble blows than ever thou wise words,
And for Rome’s good. I’ll tell thee what—yet go.
Nay, but thou shalt stay too. I would my son
Were in Arabia and thy tribe before him,
His good sword in his hand.
SICINIUS  What then?
VIRGILIA  What then?
He’d make an end of thy posterity.
VOLUMNIA  Bastards and all.
Good man, the wounds that he does bear for Rome!
MENENIUS  Come, come, peace.
SICINIUS
I would he had continued to his country
As he began, and not unknit himself
The noble knot he made.
BRUTUS  I would he had.
VOLUMNIA
“I would he had”? ’Twas you incensed the rabble.
Cats, that can judge as fitly of his worth
As I can of those mysteries which heaven
Will not have Earth to know.
BRUTUS, to Sicinius  Pray, let’s go.
VOLUMNIA  Now, pray, sir, get you gone.
You have done a brave deed. Ere you go, hear this:
As far as doth the Capitol exceed
The meanest house in Rome, so far my son—
This lady’s husband here, this, do you see?—
Whom you have banished, does exceed you all.
BRUTUS
Well, well, we’ll leave you.
SICINIUS  Why stay we to be baited
With one that wants her wits?	Tribunes exit.
VOLUMNIA  Take my prayers with
you.
I would the gods had nothing else to do
But to confirm my curses. Could I meet ’em
But once a day, it would unclog my heart
Of what lies heavy to ’t.
MENENIUS  You have told them home,
And, by my troth, you have cause. You’ll sup with
me?
VOLUMNIA
Anger’s my meat. I sup upon myself
And so shall starve with feeding.
(To Virgilia.) Come, let’s go.
Leave this faint puling, and lament as I do,
In anger, Juno-like. Come, come, come.	They exit.
MENENIUS  Fie, fie, fie!
He exits.

Scene 3
Enter a Roman (Nicanor) and a Volsce (Adrian).

ROMAN  I know you well, sir, and you know me. Your
name I think is Adrian.
VOLSCE  It is so, sir. Truly, I have forgot you.
ROMAN  I am a Roman, and my services are, as you are,
against ’em. Know you me yet?
VOLSCE  Nicanor, no?
ROMAN  The same, sir.
VOLSCE  You had more beard when I last saw you, but
your favor is well approved by your tongue.
What’s the news in Rome? I have a note from the
Volscian state to find you out there. You have well
saved me a day’s journey.
ROMAN  There hath been in Rome strange insurrections,
the people against the senators, patricians,
and nobles.
VOLSCE  Hath been? Is it ended, then? Our state thinks
not so. They are in a most warlike preparation and
hope to come upon them in the heat of their
division.
ROMAN  The main blaze of it is past, but a small thing
would make it flame again; for the nobles receive
so to heart the banishment of that worthy Coriolanus
that they are in a ripe aptness to take all power
from the people and to pluck from them their tribunes
forever. This lies glowing, I can tell you, and
is almost mature for the violent breaking out.
VOLSCE  Coriolanus banished?
ROMAN  Banished, sir.
VOLSCE  You will be welcome with this intelligence,
Nicanor.
ROMAN  The day serves well for them now. I have heard
it said the fittest time to corrupt a man’s wife is
when she’s fall’n out with her husband. Your noble
Tullus Aufidius will appear well in these wars, his
great opposer Coriolanus being now in no request
of his country.
VOLSCE  He cannot choose. I am most fortunate thus
accidentally to encounter you. You have ended my
business, and I will merrily accompany you home.
ROMAN  I shall between this and supper tell you most
strange things from Rome, all tending to the good
of their adversaries. Have you an army ready, say
you?
VOLSCE  A most royal one. The centurions and their
charges, distinctly billeted, already in th’ entertainment,
and to be on foot at an hour’s warning.
ROMAN  I am joyful to hear of their readiness and am
the man, I think, that shall set them in present action.
So, sir, heartily well met, and most glad of
your company.
VOLSCE  You take my part from me, sir. I have the most
cause to be glad of yours.
ROMAN  Well, let us go together.
They exit.

Scene 4
Enter Coriolanus in mean apparel, disguised,
and muffled.

CORIOLANUS
A goodly city is this Antium. City,
’Tis I that made thy widows. Many an heir
Of these fair edifices ’fore my wars
Have I heard groan and drop. Then, know me not,
Lest that thy wives with spits and boys with stones
In puny battle slay me.

Enter a Citizen.

Save you, sir.
CITIZEN
And you.
CORIOLANUS  Direct me, if it be your will,
Where great Aufidius lies. Is he in Antium?
CITIZEN
He is, and feasts the nobles of the state
At his house this night.
CORIOLANUS  Which is his house, beseech
you?
CITIZEN
This here before you.
CORIOLANUS  Thank you, sir. Farewell.
Citizen exits.
O world, thy slippery turns! Friends now fast sworn,
Whose double bosoms seems to wear one heart,
Whose hours, whose bed, whose meal and exercise
Are still together, who twin, as ’twere, in love
Unseparable, shall within this hour,
On a dissension of a doit, break out
To bitterest enmity; so fellest foes,
Whose passions and whose plots have broke their
sleep
To take the one the other, by some chance,
Some trick not worth an egg, shall grow dear friends
And interjoin their issues. So with me:
My birthplace hate I, and my love’s upon
This enemy town. I’ll enter. If he slay me,
He does fair justice; if he give me way,
I’ll do his country service.
He exits.

Scene 5
Music plays. Enter a Servingman.

FIRST SERVINGMAN  Wine, wine, wine! What service is
here? I think our fellows are asleep.	He exits.

Enter another Servingman.

SECOND SERVINGMAN  Where’s Cotus? My master calls
for him. Cotus!	He exits.

Enter Coriolanus.

CORIOLANUS
A goodly house. The feast smells well, but I
Appear not like a guest.

Enter the First Servingman.

FIRST SERVINGMAN  What would you have, friend?
Whence are you? Here’s no place for you. Pray, go
to the door.	He exits.
CORIOLANUS
I have deserved no better entertainment
In being Coriolanus.

Enter Second Servingman.

SECOND SERVINGMAN  Whence are you, sir?—Has the
porter his eyes in his head, that he gives entrance
to such companions?—Pray, get you out.
CORIOLANUS  Away!
SECOND SERVINGMAN  Away? Get you away.
CORIOLANUS  Now th’ art troublesome.
SECOND SERVINGMAN  Are you so brave? I’ll have you
talked with anon.

Enter Third Servingman; the First, entering,
meets him.

THIRD SERVINGMAN  What fellow’s this?
FIRST SERVINGMAN  A strange one as ever I looked on. I
cannot get him out o’ th’ house. Prithee, call my
master to him.	He steps aside.
THIRD SERVINGMAN  What have you to do here, fellow?
Pray you, avoid the house.
CORIOLANUS  Let me but stand. I will not hurt your
hearth.
THIRD SERVINGMAN  What are you?
CORIOLANUS  A gentleman.
THIRD SERVINGMAN  A marv’llous poor one.
CORIOLANUS  True, so I am.
THIRD SERVINGMAN  Pray you, poor gentleman, take up
some other station. Here’s no place for you. Pray
you, avoid. Come.
CORIOLANUS  Follow your function, go, and batten on
cold bits.	Pushes him away from him.
THIRD SERVINGMAN  What, you will not?—Prithee, tell
my master what a strange guest he has here.
SECOND SERVINGMAN  And I shall.
Second Servingman exits.
THIRD SERVINGMAN  Where dwell’st thou?
CORIOLANUS  Under the canopy.
THIRD SERVINGMAN  Under the canopy?
CORIOLANUS  Ay.
THIRD SERVINGMAN  Where’s that?
CORIOLANUS  I’ th’ city of kites and crows.
THIRD SERVINGMAN  I’ th’ city of kites and crows? What
an ass it is! Then thou dwell’st with daws too?
CORIOLANUS  No, I serve not thy master.
THIRD SERVINGMAN  How, sir? Do you meddle with my
master?
CORIOLANUS  Ay, ’tis an honester service than to meddle
with thy mistress. Thou prat’st and prat’st. Serve
with thy trencher. Hence!	Beats him away.
Third Servingman exits.

Enter Aufidius with the Second Servingman.

AUFIDIUS  Where is this fellow?
SECOND SERVINGMAN  Here, sir. I’d have beaten him like
a dog, but for disturbing the lords within.
He steps aside.
AUFIDIUS  Whence com’st thou? What wouldst thou?
Thy name? Why speak’st not? Speak, man. What’s
thy name?
CORIOLANUS, removing his muffler  If, Tullus,
Not yet thou know’st me, and seeing me, dost not
Think me for the man I am, necessity
Commands me name myself.
AUFIDIUS  What is thy name?
CORIOLANUS
A name unmusical to the Volscians’ ears
And harsh in sound to thine.
AUFIDIUS  Say, what’s thy name?
Thou hast a grim appearance, and thy face
Bears a command in ’t. Though thy tackle’s torn,
Thou show’st a noble vessel. What’s thy name?
CORIOLANUS
Prepare thy brow to frown. Know’st thou me yet?
AUFIDIUS  I know thee not. Thy name?
CORIOLANUS
My name is Caius Martius, who hath done
To thee particularly and to all the Volsces
Great hurt and mischief; thereto witness may
My surname Coriolanus. The painful service,
The extreme dangers, and the drops of blood
Shed for my thankless country are requited
But with that surname, a good memory
And witness of the malice and displeasure
Which thou shouldst bear me. Only that name
remains.
The cruelty and envy of the people,
Permitted by our dastard nobles, who
Have all forsook me, hath devoured the rest,
And suffered me by th’ voice of slaves to be
Whooped out of Rome. Now this extremity
Hath brought me to thy hearth, not out of hope—
Mistake me not—to save my life; for if
I had feared death, of all the men i’ th’ world
I would have ’voided thee, but in mere spite,
To be full quit of those my banishers,
Stand I before thee here. Then if thou hast
A heart of wreak in thee, that wilt revenge
Thine own particular wrongs and stop those maims
Of shame seen through thy country, speed thee
straight
And make my misery serve thy turn. So use it
That my revengeful services may prove
As benefits to thee, for I will fight
Against my cankered country with the spleen
Of all the under fiends. But if so be
Thou dar’st not this, and that to prove more fortunes
Thou ’rt tired, then, in a word, I also am
Longer to live most weary, and present
My throat to thee and to thy ancient malice,
Which not to cut would show thee but a fool,
Since I have ever followed thee with hate,
Drawn tuns of blood out of thy country’s breast,
And cannot live but to thy shame, unless
It be to do thee service.
AUFIDIUS  O Martius, Martius,
Each word thou hast spoke hath weeded from my
heart
A root of ancient envy. If Jupiter
Should from yond cloud speak divine things
And say ’tis true, I’d not believe them more
Than thee, all-noble Martius. Let me twine
Mine arms about that body, whereagainst
My grainèd ash an hundred times hath broke
And scarred the moon with splinters.
They embrace.
Here I clip
The anvil of my sword and do contest
As hotly and as nobly with thy love
As ever in ambitious strength I did
Contend against thy valor. Know thou first,
I loved the maid I married; never man
Sighed truer breath. But that I see thee here,
Thou noble thing, more dances my rapt heart
Than when I first my wedded mistress saw
Bestride my threshold. Why, thou Mars, I tell thee
We have a power on foot, and I had purpose
Once more to hew thy target from thy brawn
Or lose mine arm for ’t. Thou hast beat me out
Twelve several times, and I have nightly since
Dreamt of encounters ’twixt thyself and me;
We have been down together in my sleep,
Unbuckling helms, fisting each other’s throat,
And waked half dead with nothing. Worthy Martius,
Had we no other quarrel else to Rome but that
Thou art thence banished, we would muster all
From twelve to seventy and, pouring war
Into the bowels of ungrateful Rome,
Like a bold flood o’erbear ’t. O, come, go in,
And take our friendly senators by th’ hands,
Who now are here, taking their leaves of me,
Who am prepared against your territories,
Though not for Rome itself.
CORIOLANUS  You bless me, gods!
AUFIDIUS
Therefore, most absolute sir, if thou wilt have
The leading of thine own revenges, take
Th’ one half of my commission and set down—
As best thou art experienced, since thou know’st
Thy country’s strength and weakness—thine own
ways,
Whether to knock against the gates of Rome,
Or rudely visit them in parts remote
To fright them ere destroy. But come in.
Let me commend thee first to those that shall
Say yea to thy desires. A thousand welcomes!
And more a friend than ere an enemy—
Yet, Martius, that was much. Your hand. Most
welcome!	Coriolanus and Aufidius exit.

Two of the Servingmen come forward.

FIRST SERVINGMAN  Here’s a strange alteration!
SECOND SERVINGMAN  By my hand, I had thought to
have strucken him with a cudgel, and yet my mind
gave me his clothes made a false report of him.
FIRST SERVINGMAN  What an arm he has! He turned me
about with his finger and his thumb as one would
set up a top.
SECOND SERVINGMAN  Nay, I knew by his face that there
was something in him. He had, sir, a kind of face,
methought—I cannot tell how to term it.
FIRST SERVINGMAN  He had so, looking as it were—
Would I were hanged but I thought there was
more in him than I could think.
SECOND SERVINGMAN  So did I, I’ll be sworn. He is simply
the rarest man i’ th’ world.
FIRST SERVINGMAN  I think he is. But a greater soldier
than he you wot one.
SECOND SERVINGMAN  Who, my master?
FIRST SERVINGMAN  Nay, it’s no matter for that.
SECOND SERVINGMAN  Worth six on him.
FIRST SERVINGMAN  Nay, not so neither. But I take him
to be the greater soldier.
SECOND SERVINGMAN  Faith, look you, one cannot tell
how to say that. For the defense of a town our general
is excellent.
FIRST SERVINGMAN  Ay, and for an assault too.

Enter the Third Servingman.

THIRD SERVINGMAN  O slaves, I can tell you news, news,
you rascals!
BOTH  What, what, what? Let’s partake!
THIRD SERVINGMAN  I would not be a Roman, of all nations;
I had as lief be a condemned man.
BOTH  Wherefore? Wherefore?
THIRD SERVINGMAN  Why, here’s he that was wont to
thwack our general, Caius Martius.
FIRST SERVINGMAN  Why do you say “thwack our
general”?
THIRD SERVINGMAN  I do not say “thwack our general,”
but he was always good enough for him.
SECOND SERVINGMAN  Come, we are fellows and friends.
He was ever too hard for him; I have heard him
say so himself.
FIRST SERVINGMAN  He was too hard for him directly, to
say the truth on ’t, before Corioles; he scotched
him and notched him like a carbonado.
SECOND SERVINGMAN  An he had been cannibally given,
he might have boiled and eaten him too.
FIRST SERVINGMAN  But, more of thy news.
THIRD SERVINGMAN  Why, he is so made on here within
as if he were son and heir to Mars; set at upper end
o’ th’ table; no question asked him by any of the
senators but they stand bald before him. Our general
himself makes a mistress of him, sanctifies
himself with ’s hand, and turns up the white o’ th’
eye to his discourse. But the bottom of the news is,
our general is cut i’ th’ middle and but one half of
what he was yesterday, for the other has half, by
the entreaty and grant of the whole table. He’ll go,
he says, and sowl the porter of Rome gates by th’
ears. He will mow all down before him and leave
his passage polled.
SECOND SERVINGMAN  And he’s as like to do ’t as any
man I can imagine.
THIRD SERVINGMAN  Do ’t? He will do ’t! For, look you,
sir, he has as many friends as enemies, which
friends, sir, as it were, durst not, look you, sir, show
themselves, as we term it, his friends whilest he’s
in directitude.
FIRST SERVINGMAN  Directitude? What’s that?
THIRD SERVINGMAN  But when they shall see, sir, his
crest up again, and the man in blood, they will out
of their burrows like coneys after rain, and revel
all with him.
FIRST SERVINGMAN  But when goes this forward?
THIRD SERVINGMAN  Tomorrow, today, presently. You
shall have the drum struck up this afternoon. ’Tis,
as it were, a parcel of their feast, and to be executed
ere they wipe their lips.
SECOND SERVINGMAN  Why then, we shall have a stirring
world again. This peace is nothing but to rust iron,
increase tailors, and breed ballad-makers.
FIRST SERVINGMAN  Let me have war, say I. It exceeds
peace as far as day does night. It’s sprightly walking,
audible, and full of vent. Peace is a very apoplexy,
lethargy; mulled, deaf, sleepy, insensible; a getter
of more bastard children than war’s a destroyer of
men.
SECOND SERVINGMAN  ’Tis so, and as wars in some sort
may be said to be a ravisher, so it cannot be denied
but peace is a great maker of cuckolds.
FIRST SERVINGMAN  Ay, and it makes men hate one
another.
THIRD SERVINGMAN  Reason: because they then less
need one another. The wars for my money! I hope
to see Romans as cheap as Volscians. (Noise
within.) They are rising; they are rising.
FIRST AND SECOND SERVINGMEN  In, in, in, in!
They exit.

Scene 6
Enter the two Tribunes. Sicinius and Brutus.

SICINIUS
We hear not of him, neither need we fear him.
His remedies are tame—the present peace,
And quietness of the people, which before
Were in wild hurry. Here do we make his friends
Blush that the world goes well, who rather had,
Though they themselves did suffer by ’t, behold
Dissentious numbers pest’ring streets than see
Our tradesmen singing in their shops and going
About their functions friendly.
BRUTUS
We stood to ’t in good time.

Enter Menenius.

Is this Menenius?
SICINIUS
’Tis he, ’tis he. O, he is grown most kind
Of late.—Hail, sir.
MENENIUS  Hail to you both.
SICINIUS
Your Coriolanus is not much missed
But with his friends. The commonwealth doth stand,
And so would do were he more angry at it.
MENENIUS
All’s well, and might have been much better if
He could have temporized.
SICINIUS  Where is he, hear you?
MENENIUS  Nay, I hear nothing;
His mother and his wife hear nothing from him.

Enter three or four Citizens.

ALL CITIZENS, to the Tribunes
The gods preserve
you both!
SICINIUS  Good e’en, our neighbors.
BRUTUS
Good e’en to you all, good e’en to you all.
FIRST CITIZEN
Ourselves, our wives, and children, on our knees
Are bound to pray for you both.
SICINIUS  Live, and thrive!
BRUTUS
Farewell, kind neighbors. We wished Coriolanus
Had loved you as we did.
ALL CITIZENS  Now the gods keep you!
BOTH TRIBUNES  Farewell, farewell.	Citizens exit.
SICINIUS
This is a happier and more comely time
Than when these fellows ran about the streets
Crying confusion.
BRUTUS  Caius Martius was
A worthy officer i’ th’ war, but insolent,
O’ercome with pride, ambitious, past all thinking
Self-loving.
SICINIUS
And affecting one sole throne, without assistance.
MENENIUS  I think not so.
SICINIUS
We should by this, to all our lamentation,
If he had gone forth consul, found it so.
BRUTUS
The gods have well prevented it, and Rome
Sits safe and still without him.

Enter an Aedile.

AEDILE  Worthy tribunes,
There is a slave, whom we have put in prison,
Reports the Volsces with two several powers
Are entered in the Roman territories,
And with the deepest malice of the war
Destroy what lies before ’em.
MENENIUS  ’Tis Aufidius,
Who, hearing of our Martius’ banishment,
Thrusts forth his horns again into the world,
Which were inshelled when Martius stood for Rome,
And durst not once peep out.
SICINIUS  Come, what talk you of Martius?
BRUTUS
Go see this rumorer whipped. It cannot be
The Volsces dare break with us.
MENENIUS  Cannot be?
We have record that very well it can,
And three examples of the like hath been
Within my age. But reason with the fellow
Before you punish him, where he heard this,
Lest you shall chance to whip your information
And beat the messenger who bids beware
Of what is to be dreaded.
SICINIUS  Tell not me.
I know this cannot be.
BRUTUS  Not possible.

Enter a Messenger.

MESSENGER
The nobles in great earnestness are going
All to the Senate House. Some news is coming
That turns their countenances.
SICINIUS  ’Tis this slave—
Go whip him ’fore the people’s eyes—his raising,
Nothing but his report.
MESSENGER  Yes, worthy sir,
The slave’s report is seconded, and more,
More fearful, is delivered.
SICINIUS  What more fearful?
MESSENGER
It is spoke freely out of many mouths—
How probable I do not know—that Martius,
Joined with Aufidius, leads a power ’gainst Rome
And vows revenge as spacious as between
The young’st and oldest thing.
SICINIUS  This is most likely!
BRUTUS
Raised only that the weaker sort may wish
Good Martius home again.
SICINIUS  The very trick on ’t.
MENENIUS  This is unlikely;
He and Aufidius can no more atone
Than violent’st contrariety.

Enter a Second Messenger.

SECOND MESSENGER  You are sent for to the Senate.
A fearful army, led by Caius Martius
Associated with Aufidius, rages
Upon our territories, and have already
O’erborne their way, consumed with fire and took
What lay before them.

Enter Cominius.

COMINIUS, to the Tribunes  O, you have made good
work!
MENENIUS  What news? What news?
COMINIUS, to the Tribunes
You have holp to ravish your own daughters and
To melt the city leads upon your pates,
To see your wives dishonored to your noses—
MENENIUS  What’s the news? What’s the news?
COMINIUS, to the Tribunes
Your temples burnèd in their cement, and
Your franchises, whereon you stood, confined
Into an auger’s bore.
MENENIUS  Pray now, your news?—
You have made fair work, I fear me.—Pray, your
news?
If Martius should be joined with Volscians—
COMINIUS  If?
He is their god; he leads them like a thing
Made by some other deity than Nature,
That shapes man better; and they follow him
Against us brats with no less confidence
Than boys pursuing summer butterflies
Or butchers killing flies.
MENENIUS, to the Tribunes  You have made good work,
You and your apron-men, you that stood so much
Upon the voice of occupation and
The breath of garlic eaters!
COMINIUS
He’ll shake your Rome about your ears.
MENENIUS
As Hercules did shake down mellow fruit.
You have made fair work.
BRUTUS  But is this true, sir?
COMINIUS  Ay, and you’ll look pale
Before you find it other. All the regions
Do smilingly revolt, and who resists
Are mocked for valiant ignorance
And perish constant fools. Who is ’t can blame him?
Your enemies and his find something in him.
MENENIUS  We are all undone, unless
The noble man have mercy.
COMINIUS  Who shall ask it?
The Tribunes cannot do ’t for shame; the people
Deserve such pity of him as the wolf
Does of the shepherds. For his best friends, if they
Should say “Be good to Rome,” they charged him
even
As those should do that had deserved his hate
And therein showed like enemies.
MENENIUS  ’Tis true.
If he were putting to my house the brand
That should consume it, I have not the face
To say “Beseech you, cease.”—You have made fair
hands,
You and your crafts! You have crafted fair!
COMINIUS  You have
brought
A trembling upon Rome such as was never
S’ incapable of help.
TRIBUNES  Say not we brought it.
MENENIUS
How? Was ’t we? We loved him, but like beasts
And cowardly nobles, gave way unto your clusters,
Who did hoot him out o’ th’ city.
COMINIUS  But I fear
They’ll roar him in again. Tullus Aufidius,
The second name of men, obeys his points
As if he were his officer. Desperation
Is all the policy, strength, and defense
That Rome can make against them.

Enter a troop of Citizens.

MENENIUS  Here come the
clusters.—
And is Aufidius with him? You are they
That made the air unwholesome when you cast
Your stinking, greasy caps in hooting at
Coriolanus’ exile. Now he’s coming,
And not a hair upon a soldier’s head
Which will not prove a whip. As many coxcombs
As you threw caps up will he tumble down
And pay you for your voices. ’Tis no matter.
If he could burn us all into one coal,
We have deserved it.
ALL CITIZENS  Faith, we hear fearful news.
FIRST CITIZEN  For mine own part,
When I said banish him, I said ’twas pity.
SECOND CITIZEN  And so did I.
THIRD CITIZEN  And so did I. And, to say the truth, so
did very many of us. That we did we did for the
best; and though we willingly consented to his
banishment, yet it was against our will.
COMINIUS  You’re goodly things, you voices!
MENENIUS
You have made good work, you and your cry!—
Shall ’s to the Capitol?
COMINIUS  O, ay, what else?	Both exit.
SICINIUS
Go, masters, get you home. Be not dismayed.
These are a side that would be glad to have
This true which they so seem to fear. Go home,
And show no sign of fear.
FIRST CITIZEN  The gods be good to us! Come, masters,
let’s home. I ever said we were i’ th’ wrong when
we banished him.
SECOND CITIZEN  So did we all. But, come, let’s home.
Citizens exit.
BRUTUS  I do not like this news.
SICINIUS  Nor I.
BRUTUS
Let’s to the Capitol. Would half my wealth
Would buy this for a lie.
SICINIUS  Pray, let’s go.
Tribunes exit.

Scene 7
Enter Aufidius with his Lieutenant.

AUFIDIUS  Do they still fly to th’ Roman?
LIEUTENANT
I do not know what witchcraft’s in him, but
Your soldiers use him as the grace ’fore meat,
Their talk at table, and their thanks at end;
And you are dark’ned in this action, sir,
Even by your own.
AUFIDIUS  I cannot help it now,
Unless by using means I lame the foot
Of our design. He bears himself more proudlier,
Even to my person, than I thought he would
When first I did embrace him. Yet his nature
In that’s no changeling, and I must excuse
What cannot be amended.
LIEUTENANT  Yet I wish, sir—
I mean for your particular—you had not
Joined in commission with him, but either
Have borne the action of yourself or else
To him had left it solely.
AUFIDIUS
I understand thee well, and be thou sure,
When he shall come to his account, he knows not
What I can urge against him, although it seems,
And so he thinks and is no less apparent
To th’ vulgar eye, that he bears all things fairly,
And shows good husbandry for the Volscian state,
Fights dragonlike, and does achieve as soon
As draw his sword; yet he hath left undone
That which shall break his neck or hazard mine
Whene’er we come to our account.
LIEUTENANT
Sir, I beseech you, think you he’ll carry Rome?
AUFIDIUS
All places yields to him ere he sits down,
And the nobility of Rome are his;
The Senators and Patricians love him too.
The Tribunes are no soldiers, and their people
Will be as rash in the repeal as hasty
To expel him thence. I think he’ll be to Rome
As is the osprey to the fish, who takes it
By sovereignty of nature. First, he was
A noble servant to them, but he could not
Carry his honors even. Whether ’twas pride,
Which out of daily fortune ever taints
The happy man; whether defect of judgment,
To fail in the disposing of those chances
Which he was lord of; or whether nature,
Not to be other than one thing, not moving
From th’ casque to th’ cushion, but commanding
peace
Even with the same austerity and garb
As he controlled the war; but one of these—
As he hath spices of them all—not all,
For I dare so far free him—made him feared,
So hated, and so banished. But he has a merit
To choke it in the utt’rance. So our virtues
Lie in th’ interpretation of the time,
And power, unto itself most commendable,
Hath not a tomb so evident as a chair
T’ extol what it hath done.
One fire drives out one fire, one nail one nail;
Rights by rights falter; strengths by strengths do
fail.
Come, let’s away. When, Caius, Rome is thine,
Thou art poor’st of all; then shortly art thou mine.
They exit.


 

ACT 5

Scene 1
Enter Menenius, Cominius, Sicinius, Brutus (the two
Tribunes), with others.

MENENIUS
No, I’ll not go. You hear what he hath said
Which was sometime his general, who loved him
In a most dear particular. He called me father,
But what o’ that? Go you that banished him;
A mile before his tent, fall down, and knee
The way into his mercy. Nay, if he coyed
To hear Cominius speak, I’ll keep at home.
COMINIUS
He would not seem to know me.
MENENIUS  Do you hear?
COMINIUS
Yet one time he did call me by my name.
I urged our old acquaintance, and the drops
That we have bled together. “Coriolanus”
He would not answer to, forbade all names.
He was a kind of nothing, titleless,
Till he had forged himself a name o’ th’ fire
Of burning Rome.
MENENIUS, to the Tribunes
Why, so; you have made good work!
A pair of tribunes that have wracked Rome
To make coals cheap! A noble memory!
COMINIUS
I minded him how royal ’twas to pardon
When it was less expected. He replied
It was a bare petition of a state
To one whom they had punished.
MENENIUS  Very well.
Could he say less?
COMINIUS
I offered to awaken his regard
For ’s private friends. His answer to me was
He could not stay to pick them in a pile
Of noisome musty chaff. He said ’twas folly
For one poor grain or two to leave unburnt
And still to nose th’ offense.
MENENIUS  For one poor grain or two!
I am one of those! His mother, wife, his child,
And this brave fellow too, we are the grains;
You are the musty chaff, and you are smelt
Above the moon. We must be burnt for you.
SICINIUS
Nay, pray, be patient. If you refuse your aid
In this so-never-needed help, yet do not
Upbraid ’s with our distress. But sure, if you
Would be your country’s pleader, your good tongue,
More than the instant army we can make,
Might stop our countryman.
MENENIUS  No, I’ll not meddle.
SICINIUS  Pray you, go to him.
MENENIUS  What should I do?
BRUTUS
Only make trial what your love can do
For Rome, towards Martius.
MENENIUS  Well, and say that
Martius
Return me, as Cominius is returned, unheard,
What then? But as a discontented friend,
Grief-shot with his unkindness? Say ’t be so?
SICINIUS  Yet your good will
Must have that thanks from Rome after the measure
As you intended well.
MENENIUS  I’ll undertake ’t.
I think he’ll hear me. Yet to bite his lip
And hum at good Cominius much unhearts me.
He was not taken well; he had not dined.
The veins unfilled, our blood is cold, and then
We pout upon the morning, are unapt
To give or to forgive; but when we have stuffed
These pipes and these conveyances of our blood
With wine and feeding, we have suppler souls
Than in our priestlike fasts. Therefore I’ll watch him
Till he be dieted to my request,
And then I’ll set upon him.
BRUTUS
You know the very road into his kindness
And cannot lose your way.
MENENIUS  Good faith, I’ll prove him,
Speed how it will. I shall ere long have knowledge
Of my success.	He exits.
COMINIUS  He’ll never hear him.
SICINIUS  Not?
COMINIUS
I tell you, he does sit in gold, his eye
Red as ’twould burn Rome; and his injury
The jailor to his pity. I kneeled before him;
’Twas very faintly he said “Rise”; dismissed me
Thus with his speechless hand. What he would do
He sent in writing after me; what he
Would not, bound with an oath to yield to his
Conditions. So that all hope is vain
Unless his noble mother and his wife,
Who, as I hear, mean to solicit him
For mercy to his country. Therefore let’s hence
And with our fair entreaties haste them on.
They exit.

Scene 2
Enter Menenius to the Watch, or Guard.

FIRST WATCH  Stay! Whence are you?
SECOND WATCH  Stand, and go back.
MENENIUS
You guard like men; ’tis well. But by your leave,
I am an officer of state and come
To speak with Coriolanus.
FIRST WATCH  From whence?
MENENIUS  From Rome.
FIRST WATCH
You may not pass; you must return. Our general
Will no more hear from thence.
SECOND WATCH
You’ll see your Rome embraced with fire before
You’ll speak with Coriolanus.
MENENIUS  Good my friends,
If you have heard your general talk of Rome
And of his friends there, it is lots to blanks
My name hath touched your ears. It is Menenius.
FIRST WATCH
Be it so; go back. The virtue of your name
Is not here passable.
MENENIUS  I tell thee, fellow,
Thy general is my lover. I have been
The book of his good acts, whence men have read
His fame unparalleled happily amplified;
For I have ever verified my friends—
Of whom he’s chief—with all the size that verity
Would without lapsing suffer. Nay, sometimes,
Like to a bowl upon a subtle ground,
I have tumbled past the throw, and in his praise
Have almost stamped the leasing. Therefore, fellow,
I must have leave to pass.
FIRST WATCH  Faith, sir, if you had told as many lies in
his behalf as you have uttered words in your own,
you should not pass here, no, though it were as virtuous
to lie as to live chastely. Therefore, go back.
MENENIUS  Prithee, fellow, remember my name is Menenius,
always factionary on the party of your
general.
SECOND WATCH  Howsoever you have been his liar, as
you say you have, I am one that, telling true under
him, must say you cannot pass. Therefore, go back.
MENENIUS  Has he dined, can’st thou tell? For I would
not speak with him till after dinner.
FIRST WATCH  You are a Roman, are you?
MENENIUS  I am, as thy general is.
FIRST WATCH  Then you should hate Rome as he does.
Can you, when you have pushed out your gates the
very defender of them, and, in a violent popular
ignorance given your enemy your shield, think to
front his revenges with the easy groans of old
women, the virginal palms of your daughters, or
with the palsied intercession of such a decayed
dotant as you seem to be? Can you think to blow
out the intended fire your city is ready to flame in
with such weak breath as this? No, you are deceived.
Therefore, back to Rome and prepare for
your execution. You are condemned. Our general
has sworn you out of reprieve and pardon.
MENENIUS  Sirrah, if thy captain knew I were here, he
would use me with estimation.
FIRST WATCH  Come, my captain knows you not.
MENENIUS  I mean thy general.
FIRST WATCH  My general cares not for you. Back, I say,
go, lest I let forth your half pint of blood. Back!
That’s the utmost of your having. Back!
MENENIUS  Nay, but fellow, fellow—

Enter Coriolanus with Aufidius.

CORIOLANUS  What’s the matter?
MENENIUS to First Watch  Now, you companion, I’ll
say an errand for you. You shall know now that I
am in estimation; you shall perceive that a Jack
guardant cannot office me from my son Coriolanus.
Guess but by my entertainment with him
if thou stand’st not i’ th’ state of hanging or of some
death more long in spectatorship and crueler in
suffering; behold now presently, and swoon for
what’s to come upon thee. (To Coriolanus.) The
glorious gods sit in hourly synod about thy particular
prosperity and love thee no worse than thy old
father Menenius does! O my son, my son! (He
weeps.) Thou art preparing fire for us; look thee,
here’s water to quench it. I was hardly moved to
come to thee; but being assured none but myself
could move thee, I have been blown out of your
gates with sighs, and conjure thee to pardon Rome
and thy petitionary countrymen. The good gods
assuage thy wrath and turn the dregs of it upon
this varlet here, this, who, like a block, hath denied
my access to thee.
CORIOLANUS  Away!
MENENIUS  How? Away?
CORIOLANUS
Wife, mother, child, I know not. My affairs
Are servanted to others. Though I owe
My revenge properly, my remission lies
In Volscian breasts. That we have been familiar,
Ingrate forgetfulness shall poison rather
Than pity note how much. Therefore, begone.
Mine ears against your suits are stronger than
Your gates against my force. Yet, for I loved thee,
Take this along; I writ it for thy sake,
He gives Menenius a paper.
And would have sent it. Another word, Menenius,
I will not hear thee speak.—This man, Aufidius,
Was my beloved in Rome; yet thou behold’st.
AUFIDIUS  You keep a constant temper.	They exit.
The Guard and Menenius remain.
FIRST WATCH  Now, sir, is your name Menenius?
SECOND WATCH  ’Tis a spell, you see, of much power. You
know the way home again.
FIRST WATCH  Do you hear how we are shent for keeping
your Greatness back?
SECOND WATCH  What cause do you think I have to
swoon?
MENENIUS  I neither care for th’ world nor your general.
For such things as you, I can scarce think
there’s any, you’re so slight. He that hath a will to
die by himself fears it not from another. Let your
general do his worst. For you, be that you are,
long; and your misery increase with your age! I say
to you, as I was said to, away!	He exits.
FIRST WATCH  A noble fellow, I warrant him.
SECOND WATCH  The worthy fellow is our general. He’s
the rock, the oak not to be wind-shaken.
Watch exit.

Scene 3
Enter Coriolanus and Aufidius.

CORIOLANUS
We will before the walls of Rome tomorrow
Set down our host. My partner in this action,
You must report to th’ Volscian lords how plainly
I have borne this business.
AUFIDIUS  Only their ends
You have respected, stopped your ears against
The general suit of Rome, never admitted
A private whisper, no, not with such friends
That thought them sure of you.
CORIOLANUS  This last old man,
Whom with a cracked heart I have sent to Rome,
Loved me above the measure of a father,
Nay, godded me indeed. Their latest refuge
Was to send him, for whose old love I have—
Though I showed sourly to him—once more offered
The first conditions, which they did refuse
And cannot now accept, to grace him only
That thought he could do more. A very little
I have yielded to. Fresh embassies and suits,
Nor from the state nor private friends, hereafter
Will I lend ear to.	Shout within.
Ha? What shout is this?
Shall I be tempted to infringe my vow
In the same time ’tis made? I will not.

Enter Virgilia, Volumnia, Valeria, young Martius,
with Attendants.

My wife comes foremost, then the honored mold
Wherein this trunk was framed, and in her hand
The grandchild to her blood. But out, affection!
All bond and privilege of nature, break!
Let it be virtuous to be obstinate.	Virgilia curtsies.
What is that curtsy worth? Or those doves’ eyes,
Which can make gods forsworn? I melt and am not
Of stronger earth than others.	Volumnia bows.
My mother bows,
As if Olympus to a molehill should
In supplication nod; and my young boy
Hath an aspect of intercession which
Great Nature cries “Deny not!” Let the Volsces
Plow Rome and harrow Italy, I’ll never
Be such a gosling to obey instinct, but stand
As if a man were author of himself,
And knew no other kin.
VIRGILIA  My lord and husband.
CORIOLANUS
These eyes are not the same I wore in Rome.
VIRGILIA
The sorrow that delivers us thus changed
Makes you think so.
CORIOLANUS  Like a dull actor now,
I have forgot my part, and I am out,
Even to a full disgrace. Best of my flesh,
Forgive my tyranny, but do not say
For that “Forgive our Romans.”	They kiss.
O, a kiss
Long as my exile, sweet as my revenge!
Now, by the jealous queen of heaven, that kiss
I carried from thee, dear, and my true lip
Hath virgined it e’er since. You gods! I prate
And the most noble mother of the world
Leave unsaluted. Sink, my knee, i’ th’ earth;	Kneels.
Of thy deep duty more impression show
Than that of common sons.
VOLUMNIA  O, stand up blest,
He rises.
Whilst with no softer cushion than the flint
I kneel before thee and unproperly
Show duty, as mistaken all this while
Between the child and parent.	She kneels.
CORIOLANUS  What’s this?
Your knees to me? To your corrected son?
He raises her up.
Then let the pebbles on the hungry beach
Fillip the stars! Then let the mutinous winds
Strike the proud cedars ’gainst the fiery sun,
Murdering impossibility to make
What cannot be slight work.
VOLUMNIA  Thou art my warrior;
I holp to frame thee. Do you know this lady?
CORIOLANUS
The noble sister of Publicola,
The moon of Rome, chaste as the icicle
That’s curdied by the frost from purest snow
And hangs on Dian’s temple!—Dear Valeria.
VOLUMNIA, presenting young Martius
This is a poor epitome of yours,
Which by th’ interpretation of full time
May show like all yourself.
CORIOLANUS, to young Martius  The god of soldiers,
With the consent of supreme Jove, inform
Thy thoughts with nobleness, that thou mayst prove
To shame unvulnerable, and stick i’ th’ wars
Like a great seamark standing every flaw
And saving those that eye thee.
VOLUMNIA, to young Martius  Your knee, sirrah.
He kneels.
CORIOLANUS  That’s my brave boy!
VOLUMNIA
Even he, your wife, this lady, and myself
Are suitors to you.	Young Martius rises.
CORIOLANUS  I beseech you, peace;
Or if you’d ask, remember this before:
The thing I have forsworn to grant may never
Be held by you denials. Do not bid me
Dismiss my soldiers or capitulate
Again with Rome’s mechanics. Tell me not
Wherein I seem unnatural; desire not
T’ allay my rages and revenges with
Your colder reasons.
VOLUMNIA  O, no more, no more!
You have said you will not grant us anything;
For we have nothing else to ask but that
Which you deny already. Yet we will ask,
That if you fail in our request, the blame
May hang upon your hardness. Therefore hear us.
CORIOLANUS
Aufidius, and you Volsces, mark, for we’ll
Hear naught from Rome in private. He sits. Your
request?
VOLUMNIA
Should we be silent and not speak, our raiment
And state of bodies would bewray what life
We have led since thy exile. Think with thyself
How more unfortunate than all living women
Are we come hither; since that thy sight, which
should
Make our eyes flow with joy, hearts dance with
comforts,
Constrains them weep and shake with fear and
sorrow,
Making the mother, wife, and child to see
The son, the husband, and the father tearing
His country’s bowels out. And to poor we
Thine enmity’s most capital. Thou barr’st us
Our prayers to the gods, which is a comfort
That all but we enjoy. For how can we—
Alas, how can we—for our country pray,
Whereto we are bound, together with thy victory,
Whereto we are bound? Alack, or we must lose
The country, our dear nurse, or else thy person,
Our comfort in the country. We must find
An evident calamity, though we had
Our wish, which side should win, for either thou
Must as a foreign recreant be led
With manacles through our streets, or else
Triumphantly tread on thy country’s ruin
And bear the palm for having bravely shed
Thy wife and children’s blood. For myself, son,
I purpose not to wait on fortune till
These wars determine. If I cannot persuade thee
Rather to show a noble grace to both parts
Than seek the end of one, thou shalt no sooner
March to assault thy country than to tread—
Trust to ’t, thou shalt not—on thy mother’s womb
That brought thee to this world.
VIRGILIA  Ay, and mine,
That brought you forth this boy to keep your name
Living to time.
YOUNG MARTIUS  He shall not tread on me.
I’ll run away till I am bigger, but then I’ll fight.
CORIOLANUS
Not of a woman’s tenderness to be
Requires nor child nor woman’s face to see.—
I have sat too long.	He rises.
VOLUMNIA  Nay, go not from us thus.
If it were so, that our request did tend
To save the Romans, thereby to destroy
The Volsces whom you serve, you might condemn
us
As poisonous of your honor. No, our suit
Is that you reconcile them, while the Volsces
May say “This mercy we have showed,” the Romans
“This we received,” and each in either side
Give the all-hail to thee and cry “Be blest
For making up this peace!” Thou know’st, great son,
The end of war’s uncertain, but this certain,
That, if thou conquer Rome, the benefit
Which thou shalt thereby reap is such a name
Whose repetition will be dogged with curses,
Whose chronicle thus writ: “The man was noble,
But with his last attempt he wiped it out,
Destroyed his country, and his name remains
To th’ ensuing age abhorred.” Speak to me, son.
Thou hast affected the fine strains of honor
To imitate the graces of the gods,
To tear with thunder the wide cheeks o’ th’ air
And yet to charge thy sulfur with a bolt
That should but rive an oak. Why dost not speak?
Think’st thou it honorable for a noble man
Still to remember wrongs?—Daughter, speak you.
He cares not for your weeping.—Speak thou, boy.
Perhaps thy childishness will move him more
Than can our reasons.—There’s no man in the world
More bound to ’s mother, yet here he lets me prate
Like one i’ th’ stocks. Thou hast never in thy life
Showed thy dear mother any courtesy
When she, poor hen, fond of no second brood,
Has clucked thee to the wars and safely home,
Loaden with honor. Say my request’s unjust
And spurn me back; but if it be not so,
Thou art not honest, and the gods will plague thee
That thou restrain’st from me the duty which
To a mother’s part belongs.—He turns away.—
Down, ladies! Let us shame him with our knees.
To his surname Coriolanus ’longs more pride
Than pity to our prayers. Down! An end.
They kneel.
This is the last. So, we will home to Rome
And die among our neighbors.—Nay, behold ’s.
This boy that cannot tell what he would have,
But kneels and holds up hands for fellowship,
Does reason our petition with more strength
Than thou hast to deny ’t.—Come, let us go.
They rise.
This fellow had a Volscian to his mother,
His wife is in Corioles, and his child
Like him by chance.—Yet give us our dispatch.
I am hushed until our city be afire,
And then I’ll speak a little.
He holds her by the hand, silent.
CORIOLANUS  O mother, mother!
What have you done? Behold, the heavens do ope,
The gods look down, and this unnatural scene
They laugh at. O, my mother, mother, O!
You have won a happy victory to Rome,
But, for your son—believe it, O, believe it!—
Most dangerously you have with him prevailed,
If not most mortal to him. But let it come.—
Aufidius, though I cannot make true wars,
I’ll frame convenient peace. Now, good Aufidius,
Were you in my stead, would you have heard
A mother less? Or granted less, Aufidius?
AUFIDIUS
I was moved withal.
CORIOLANUS  I dare be sworn you were.
And, sir, it is no little thing to make
Mine eyes to sweat compassion. But, good sir,
What peace you’ll make advise me. For my part,
I’ll not to Rome. I’ll back with you; and pray you,
Stand to me in this cause.—O mother!—Wife!
He speaks with them aside.
AUFIDIUS, aside
I am glad thou hast set thy mercy and thy honor
At difference in thee. Out of that I’ll work
Myself a former fortune.
CORIOLANUS, to the Women  Ay, by and by;
But we will drink together, and you shall bear
A better witness back than words, which we,
On like conditions, will have countersealed.
Come, enter with us. Ladies, you deserve
To have a temple built you. All the swords
In Italy, and her confederate arms,
Could not have made this peace.
They exit.

Scene 4
Enter Menenius and Sicinius.

MENENIUS  See you yond coign o’ th’ Capitol, yond
cornerstone?
SICINIUS  Why, what of that?
MENENIUS  If it be possible for you to displace it with
your little finger, there is some hope the ladies of
Rome, especially his mother, may prevail with
him. But I say there is no hope in ’t. Our throats
are sentenced and stay upon execution.
SICINIUS  Is ’t possible that so short a time can alter the
condition of a man?
MENENIUS  There is differency between a grub and a
butterfly, yet your butterfly was a grub. This Martius
is grown from man to dragon. He has wings;
he’s more than a creeping thing.
SICINIUS  He loved his mother dearly.
MENENIUS  So did he me; and he no more remembers
his mother now than an eight-year-old horse. The
tartness of his face sours ripe grapes. When he
walks, he moves like an engine, and the ground
shrinks before his treading. He is able to pierce a
corslet with his eye, talks like a knell, and his hum
is a battery. He sits in his state as a thing made for
Alexander. What he bids be done is finished with
his bidding. He wants nothing of a god but eternity
and a heaven to throne in.
SICINIUS  Yes, mercy, if you report him truly.
MENENIUS  I paint him in the character. Mark what
mercy his mother shall bring from him. There is
no more mercy in him than there is milk in a male
tiger. That shall our poor city find, and all this is
long of you.
SICINIUS  The gods be good unto us.
MENENIUS  No, in such a case the gods will not be good
unto us. When we banished him, we respected not
them; and he returning to break our necks, they
respect not us.

Enter a Messenger.

MESSENGER, to Sicinius
Sir, if you’d save your life, fly to your house.
The plebeians have got your fellow tribune
And hale him up and down, all swearing if
The Roman ladies bring not comfort home,
They’ll give him death by inches.

Enter another Messenger.

SICINIUS  What’s the news?
SECOND MESSENGER
Good news, good news! The ladies have prevailed.
The Volscians are dislodged and Martius gone.
A merrier day did never yet greet Rome,
No, not th’ expulsion of the Tarquins.
SICINIUS  Friend,
Art thou certain this is true? Is ’t most certain?
SECOND MESSENGER
As certain as I know the sun is fire.
Where have you lurked that you make doubt of it?
Ne’er through an arch so hurried the blown tide
As the recomforted through th’ gates. Why, hark you!

Trumpets, hautboys, drums beat, all together.

The trumpets, sackbuts, psalteries, and fifes,
Tabors and cymbals, and the shouting Romans
Make the sun dance. Hark you!	A shout within.
MENENIUS  This is good news.
I will go meet the ladies. This Volumnia
Is worth of consuls, senators, patricians
A city full; of tribunes such as you
A sea and land full. You have prayed well today.
This morning for ten thousand of your throats
I’d not have given a doit. Hark, how they joy!
Sound still with the shouts.
SICINIUS, to Second Messenger  First, the gods bless
you for your tidings; next, accept my thankfulness.
SECOND MESSENGER
Sir, we have all great cause to give great thanks.
SICINIUS  They are near the city?
SECOND MESSENGER  Almost at point to enter.
SICINIUS  We’ll meet them, and help the joy.
They exit.

Scene 5
Enter two Senators, with Ladies (Volumnia, Virgilia,
Valeria) passing over the stage, with other Lords.

SENATOR
Behold our patroness, the life of Rome!
Call all your tribes together, praise the gods,
And make triumphant fires. Strew flowers before
them,
Unshout the noise that banished Martius,
Repeal him with the welcome of his mother.
Cry “Welcome, ladies, welcome!”
ALL  Welcome, ladies, welcome!
A flourish with drums and trumpets.
They exit.

Scene 6
Enter Tullus Aufidius, with Attendants.

AUFIDIUS
Go tell the lords o’ th’ city I am here.
Deliver them this paper.	(He gives them a paper.)
Having read it,
Bid them repair to th’ marketplace, where I,
Even in theirs and in the commons’ ears,
Will vouch the truth of it. Him I accuse
The city ports by this hath entered and
Intends t’ appear before the people, hoping
To purge himself with words. Dispatch.
The Attendants exit.

Enter three or four Conspirators of Aufidius’s faction.

Most welcome!
FIRST CONSPIRATOR
How is it with our general?
AUFIDIUS  Even so
As with a man by his own alms empoisoned
And with his charity slain.
SECOND CONSPIRATOR  Most noble sir,
If you do hold the same intent wherein
You wished us parties, we’ll deliver you
Of your great danger.
AUFIDIUS  Sir, I cannot tell.
We must proceed as we do find the people.
THIRD CONSPIRATOR
The people will remain uncertain whilst
’Twixt you there’s difference, but the fall of either
Makes the survivor heir of all.
AUFIDIUS  I know it,
And my pretext to strike at him admits
A good construction. I raised him, and I pawned
Mine honor for his truth, who, being so heightened,
He watered his new plants with dews of flattery,
Seducing so my friends; and to this end,
He bowed his nature, never known before
But to be rough, unswayable, and free.
THIRD CONSPIRATOR  Sir, his stoutness
When he did stand for consul, which he lost
By lack of stooping—
AUFIDIUS  That I would have spoke of.
Being banished for ’t, he came unto my hearth,
Presented to my knife his throat. I took him,
Made him joint servant with me, gave him way
In all his own desires; nay, let him choose
Out of my files, his projects to accomplish,
My best and freshest men; served his designments
In mine own person; holp to reap the fame
Which he did end all his; and took some pride
To do myself this wrong; till at the last
I seemed his follower, not partner; and
He waged me with his countenance as if
I had been mercenary.
FIRST CONSPIRATOR  So he did, my lord.
The army marvelled at it, and, in the last,
When he had carried Rome and that we looked
For no less spoil than glory—
AUFIDIUS  There was it
For which my sinews shall be stretched upon him.
At a few drops of women’s rheum, which are
As cheap as lies, he sold the blood and labor
Of our great action. Therefore shall he die,
And I’ll renew me in his fall. But hark!

Drums and trumpets sounds, with great shouts
of the people.

FIRST CONSPIRATOR
Your native town you entered like a post
And had no welcomes home, but he returns
Splitting the air with noise.
SECOND CONSPIRATOR  And patient fools,
Whose children he hath slain, their base throats tear
With giving him glory.
THIRD CONSPIRATOR  Therefore at your vantage,
Ere he express himself or move the people
With what he would say, let him feel your sword,
Which we will second. When he lies along,
After your way his tale pronounced shall bury
His reasons with his body.
AUFIDIUS  Say no more.

Enter the Lords of the city.

Here come the lords.
ALL LORDS
You are most welcome home.
AUFIDIUS  I have not deserved it.
But, worthy lords, have you with heed perused
What I have written to you?
ALL LORDS  We have.
FIRST LORD  And grieve to hear ’t.
What faults he made before the last, I think
Might have found easy fines, but there to end
Where he was to begin and give away
The benefit of our levies, answering us
With our own charge, making a treaty where
There was a yielding—this admits no excuse.

Enter Coriolanus marching with Drum and Colors, the
Commoners being with him.

AUFIDIUS  He approaches. You shall hear him.
CORIOLANUS
Hail, lords! I am returned your soldier,
No more infected with my country’s love
Than when I parted hence, but still subsisting
Under your great command. You are to know
That prosperously I have attempted, and
With bloody passage led your wars even to
The gates of Rome. Our spoils we have brought
home
Doth more than counterpoise a full third part
The charges of the action. We have made peace
With no less honor to the Antiates
Than shame to th’ Romans, and we here deliver,
Subscribed by’ th’ Consuls and patricians,
Together with the seal o’ th’ Senate, what
We have compounded on.
He offers the lords a paper.
AUFIDIUS  Read it not, noble lords,
But tell the traitor in the highest degree
He hath abused your powers.
CORIOLANUS  “Traitor”? How now?
AUFIDIUS  Ay, traitor, Martius.
CORIOLANUS  Martius?
AUFIDIUS
Ay, Martius, Caius Martius. Dost thou think
I’ll grace thee with that robbery, thy stol’n name
Coriolanus, in Corioles?
You lords and heads o’ th’ state, perfidiously
He has betrayed your business and given up
For certain drops of salt your city Rome—
I say your city—to his wife and mother,
Breaking his oath and resolution like
A twist of rotten silk, never admitting
Counsel o’ th’ war, but at his nurse’s tears
He whined and roared away your victory,
That pages blushed at him and men of heart
Looked wond’ring each at other.
CORIOLANUS  Hear’st thou, Mars?
AUFIDIUS  Name not the god, thou boy of tears.
CORIOLANUS  Ha?
AUFIDIUS  No more.
CORIOLANUS
Measureless liar, thou hast made my heart
Too great for what contains it. “Boy”? O slave!—
Pardon me, lords, ’tis the first time that ever
I was forced to scold. Your judgments, my grave
lords,
Must give this cur the lie; and his own notion—
Who wears my stripes impressed upon him, that
Must bear my beating to his grave—shall join
To thrust the lie unto him.
FIRST LORD  Peace, both, and hear me speak.
CORIOLANUS
Cut me to pieces, Volsces. Men and lads,
Stain all your edges on me. “Boy”? False hound!
If you have writ your annals true, ’tis there
That like an eagle in a dovecote, I
Fluttered your Volscians in Corioles,
Alone I did it. “Boy”!
AUFIDIUS  Why, noble lords,
Will you be put in mind of his blind fortune,
Which was your shame, by this unholy braggart,
’Fore your own eyes and ears?
ALL CONSPIRATORS  Let him die for ’t.
ALL PEOPLE  Tear him to pieces! Do it presently! He
killed my son! My daughter! He killed my cousin
Marcus! He killed my father!
SECOND LORD  Peace, ho! No outrage! Peace!
The man is noble, and his fame folds in
This orb o’ th’ Earth. His last offenses to us
Shall have judicious hearing. Stand, Aufidius,
And trouble not the peace.
CORIOLANUS, drawing his sword  O, that I had him,
With six Aufidiuses, or more, his tribe,
To use my lawful sword.
AUFIDIUS  Insolent villain!
ALL CONSPIRATORS  Kill, kill, kill, kill, kill him!

Draw the Conspirators, and kills Martius, who falls.
Aufidius stands on him.

LORDS  Hold, hold, hold, hold!
AUFIDIUS
My noble masters, hear me speak.
FIRST LORD  O Tullus!
SECOND LORD
Thou hast done a deed whereat valor will weep.
THIRD LORD
Tread not upon him.—Masters, all be quiet.—
Put up your swords.
AUFIDIUS
My lords, when you shall know—as in this rage,
Provoked by him, you cannot—the great danger
Which this man’s life did owe you, you’ll rejoice
That he is thus cut off. Please it your Honors
To call me to your senate, I’ll deliver
Myself your loyal servant or endure
Your heaviest censure.
FIRST LORD  Bear from hence his body,
And mourn you for him. Let him be regarded
As the most noble corse that ever herald
Did follow to his urn.
SECOND LORD  His own impatience
Takes from Aufidius a great part of blame.
Let’s make the best of it.
AUFIDIUS  My rage is gone,
And I am struck with sorrow.—Take him up.
Help, three o’ th’ chiefest soldiers; I’ll be one.—
Beat thou the drum that it speak mournfully.—
Trail your steel pikes. Though in this city he
Hath widowed and unchilded many a one,
Which to this hour bewail the injury,
Yet he shall have a noble memory.
Assist.
They exit bearing the body of Martius.
A dead march sounded.

Richard III
 
 
ACT 1
 
Scene 1
Enter Richard, Duke of Gloucester, alone.
 
RICHARD
Now is the winter of our discontent
Made glorious summer by this son of York,
And all the clouds that loured upon our house
In the deep bosom of the ocean buried.
Now are our brows bound with victorious wreaths,
Our bruisèd arms hung up for monuments,
Our stern alarums changed to merry meetings,
Our dreadful marches to delightful measures.
Grim-visaged war hath smoothed his wrinkled front;
And now, instead of mounting barbèd steeds
To fright the souls of fearful adversaries,
He capers nimbly in a lady’s chamber
To the lascivious pleasing of a lute.
But I, that am not shaped for sportive tricks,
Nor made to court an amorous looking glass;
I, that am rudely stamped and want love’s majesty
To strut before a wanton ambling nymph;
I, that am curtailed of this fair proportion,
Cheated of feature by dissembling nature,
Deformed, unfinished, sent before my time
Into this breathing world scarce half made up,
And that so lamely and unfashionable
That dogs bark at me as I halt by them—
Why, I, in this weak piping time of peace,
Have no delight to pass away the time,
Unless to see my shadow in the sun
And descant on mine own deformity.
And therefore, since I cannot prove a lover
To entertain these fair well-spoken days,
I am determinèd to prove a villain
And hate the idle pleasures of these days.
Plots have I laid, inductions dangerous,
By drunken prophecies, libels, and dreams,
To set my brother Clarence and the King
In deadly hate, the one against the other;
And if King Edward be as true and just
As I am subtle, false, and treacherous,
This day should Clarence closely be mewed up
About a prophecy which says that “G”
Of Edward’s heirs the murderer shall be.
Dive, thoughts, down to my soul. Here Clarence
comes.
 
Enter Clarence, guarded, and Brakenbury.
 
Brother, good day. What means this armèd guard
That waits upon your Grace?
CLARENCE  His Majesty,
Tend’ring my person’s safety, hath appointed
This conduct to convey me to the Tower.
RICHARD
Upon what cause?
CLARENCE  Because my name is
George.
RICHARD
Alack, my lord, that fault is none of yours.
He should, for that, commit your godfathers.
O, belike his Majesty hath some intent
That you should be new christened in the Tower.
But what’s the matter, Clarence? May I know?
CLARENCE
Yea, Richard, when I know, for I protest
As yet I do not. But, as I can learn,
He hearkens after prophecies and dreams,
And from the crossrow plucks the letter G,
And says a wizard told him that by “G”
His issue disinherited should be.
And for my name of George begins with G,
It follows in his thought that I am he.
These, as I learn, and such like toys as these
Hath moved his Highness to commit me now.
RICHARD
Why, this it is when men are ruled by women.
’Tis not the King that sends you to the Tower.
My Lady Grey his wife, Clarence, ’tis she
That tempers him to this extremity.
Was it not she and that good man of worship,
Anthony Woodeville, her brother there,
That made him send Lord Hastings to the Tower,
From whence this present day he is delivered?
We are not safe, Clarence; we are not safe.
CLARENCE
By heaven, I think there is no man secure
But the Queen’s kindred and night-walking heralds
That trudge betwixt the King and Mistress Shore.
Heard you not what an humble suppliant
Lord Hastings was to her for his delivery?
RICHARD
Humbly complaining to her Deity
Got my Lord Chamberlain his liberty.
I’ll tell you what: I think it is our way,
If we will keep in favor with the King,
To be her men and wear her livery.
The jealous o’erworn widow and herself,
Since that our brother dubbed them gentlewomen,
Are mighty gossips in our monarchy.
BRAKENBURY
I beseech your Graces both to pardon me.
His Majesty hath straitly given in charge
That no man shall have private conference,
Of what degree soever, with your brother.
RICHARD
Even so. An please your Worship, Brakenbury,
You may partake of anything we say.
We speak no treason, man. We say the King
Is wise and virtuous, and his noble queen
Well struck in years, fair, and not jealous.
We say that Shore’s wife hath a pretty foot,
A cherry lip, a bonny eye, a passing pleasing tongue,
And that the Queen’s kindred are made gentlefolks.
How say you, sir? Can you deny all this?
BRAKENBURY
With this, my lord, myself have naught to do.
RICHARD
Naught to do with Mistress Shore? I tell thee,
fellow,
He that doth naught with her, excepting one,
Were best to do it secretly, alone.
BRAKENBURY
I do beseech your Grace to pardon me, and withal
Forbear your conference with the noble duke.
CLARENCE
We know thy charge, Brakenbury, and will obey.
RICHARD
We are the Queen’s abjects and must obey.—
Brother, farewell. I will unto the King,
And whatsoe’er you will employ me in,
Were it to call King Edward’s widow “sister,”
I will perform it to enfranchise you.
Meantime, this deep disgrace in brotherhood
Touches me deeper than you can imagine.
CLARENCE
I know it pleaseth neither of us well.
RICHARD
Well, your imprisonment shall not be long.
I will deliver you or else lie for you.
Meantime, have patience.
CLARENCE  I must, perforce. Farewell.
Exit Clarence, Brakenbury, and guard.
RICHARD
Go tread the path that thou shalt ne’er return.
Simple, plain Clarence, I do love thee so
That I will shortly send thy soul to heaven,
If heaven will take the present at our hands.
But who comes here? The new-delivered Hastings?
 
Enter Lord Hastings.
 
HASTINGS
Good time of day unto my gracious lord.
RICHARD
As much unto my good Lord Chamberlain.
Well are you welcome to the open air.
How hath your Lordship brooked imprisonment?
HASTINGS
With patience, noble lord, as prisoners must.
But I shall live, my lord, to give them thanks
That were the cause of my imprisonment.
RICHARD
No doubt, no doubt; and so shall Clarence too,
For they that were your enemies are his
And have prevailed as much on him as you.
HASTINGS
More pity that the eagles should be mewed,
Whiles kites and buzzards prey at liberty.
RICHARD  What news abroad?
HASTINGS
No news so bad abroad as this at home:
The King is sickly, weak, and melancholy,
And his physicians fear him mightily.
RICHARD
Now, by Saint John, that news is bad indeed.
O, he hath kept an evil diet long,
And overmuch consumed his royal person.
’Tis very grievous to be thought upon.
Where is he, in his bed?
HASTINGS  He is.
RICHARD
Go you before, and I will follow you.
Exit Hastings.
He cannot live, I hope, and must not die
Till George be packed with post-horse up to heaven.
I’ll in to urge his hatred more to Clarence
With lies well steeled with weighty arguments,
And, if I fail not in my deep intent,
Clarence hath not another day to live;
Which done, God take King Edward to His mercy,
And leave the world for me to bustle in.
For then I’ll marry Warwick’s youngest daughter.
What though I killed her husband and her father?
The readiest way to make the wench amends
Is to become her husband and her father;
The which will I, not all so much for love
As for another secret close intent
By marrying her which I must reach unto.
But yet I run before my horse to market.
Clarence still breathes; Edward still lives and reigns.
When they are gone, then must I count my gains.
He exits.
 
Scene 2
Enter the corse of Henry the Sixth on a bier, with
Halberds to guard it, Lady Anne being the mourner,
accompanied by Gentlemen.
 
ANNE
Set down, set down your honorable load,
If honor may be shrouded in a hearse,
Whilst I awhile obsequiously lament
Th’ untimely fall of virtuous Lancaster.
They set down the bier.
Poor key-cold figure of a holy king,
Pale ashes of the house of Lancaster,
Thou bloodless remnant of that royal blood,
Be it lawful that I invocate thy ghost
To hear the lamentations of poor Anne,
Wife to thy Edward, to thy slaughtered son,
Stabbed by the selfsame hand that made these
wounds.
Lo, in these windows that let forth thy life
I pour the helpless balm of my poor eyes.
O, cursèd be the hand that made these holes;
Cursèd the heart that had the heart to do it;
Cursèd the blood that let this blood from hence.
More direful hap betide that hated wretch
That makes us wretched by the death of thee
Than I can wish to wolves, to spiders, toads,
Or any creeping venomed thing that lives.
If ever he have child, abortive be it,
Prodigious, and untimely brought to light,
Whose ugly and unnatural aspect
May fright the hopeful mother at the view,
And that be heir to his unhappiness.
If ever he have wife, let her be made
More miserable by the death of him
Than I am made by my young lord and thee.—
Come now towards Chertsey with your holy load,
Taken from Paul’s to be interrèd there.
They take up the bier.
And still, as you are weary of this weight,
Rest you, whiles I lament King Henry’s corse.
 
Enter Richard, Duke of Gloucester.
 
RICHARD
Stay, you that bear the corse, and set it down.
ANNE
What black magician conjures up this fiend
To stop devoted charitable deeds?
RICHARD
Villains, set down the corse or, by Saint Paul,
I’ll make a corse of him that disobeys.
GENTLEMAN
My lord, stand back and let the coffin pass.
RICHARD
Unmannered dog, stand thou when I command!—
Advance thy halberd higher than my breast,
Or by Saint Paul I’ll strike thee to my foot
And spurn upon thee, beggar, for thy boldness.
They set down the bier.
ANNE, to the Gentlemen and Halberds
What, do you tremble? Are you all afraid?
Alas, I blame you not, for you are mortal,
And mortal eyes cannot endure the devil.—
Avaunt, thou dreadful minister of hell.
Thou hadst but power over his mortal body;
His soul thou canst not have. Therefore begone.
RICHARD
Sweet saint, for charity, be not so curst.
ANNE
Foul devil, for God’s sake, hence, and trouble us
not,
For thou hast made the happy Earth thy hell,
Filled it with cursing cries and deep exclaims.
If thou delight to view thy heinous deeds,
Behold this pattern of thy butcheries.
She points to the corpse.
O, gentlemen, see, see dead Henry’s wounds
Open their congealed mouths and bleed afresh!—
Blush, blush, thou lump of foul deformity,
For ’tis thy presence that exhales this blood
From cold and empty veins where no blood dwells.
Thy deeds, inhuman and unnatural,
Provokes this deluge most unnatural.—
O God, which this blood mad’st, revenge his death!
O Earth, which this blood drink’st, revenge his
death!
Either heaven with lightning strike the murderer
dead,
Or Earth gape open wide and eat him quick,
As thou dost swallow up this good king’s blood,
Which his hell-governed arm hath butcherèd.
RICHARD
Lady, you know no rules of charity,
Which renders good for bad, blessings for curses.
ANNE
Villain, thou know’st nor law of God nor man.
No beast so fierce but knows some touch of pity.
RICHARD
But I know none, and therefore am no beast.
ANNE
O, wonderful, when devils tell the truth!
RICHARD
More wonderful, when angels are so angry.
Vouchsafe, divine perfection of a woman,
Of these supposèd crimes to give me leave
By circumstance but to acquit myself.
ANNE
Vouchsafe, defused infection of a man,
Of these known evils but to give me leave
By circumstance to curse thy cursèd self.
RICHARD
Fairer than tongue can name thee, let me have
Some patient leisure to excuse myself.
ANNE
Fouler than heart can think thee, thou canst make
No excuse current but to hang thyself.
RICHARD
By such despair I should accuse myself.
ANNE
And by despairing shalt thou stand excused
For doing worthy vengeance on thyself
That didst unworthy slaughter upon others.
RICHARD  Say that I slew them not.
ANNE  Then say they were not slain.
But dead they are, and, devilish slave, by thee.
RICHARD  I did not kill your husband.
ANNE  Why then, he is alive.
RICHARD
Nay, he is dead, and slain by Edward’s hands.
ANNE
In thy foul throat thou liest. Queen Margaret saw
Thy murd’rous falchion smoking in his blood,
The which thou once didst bend against her breast,
But that thy brothers beat aside the point.
RICHARD
I was provokèd by her sland’rous tongue,
That laid their guilt upon my guiltless shoulders.
ANNE
Thou wast provokèd by thy bloody mind,
That never dream’st on aught but butcheries.
Didst thou not kill this king?
RICHARD  I grant you.
ANNE
Dost grant me, hedgehog? Then, God grant me too
Thou mayst be damnèd for that wicked deed.
O, he was gentle, mild, and virtuous.
RICHARD
The better for the King of heaven that hath him.
ANNE
He is in heaven, where thou shalt never come.
RICHARD
Let him thank me, that holp to send him thither,
For he was fitter for that place than Earth.
ANNE
And thou unfit for any place but hell.
RICHARD
Yes, one place else, if you will hear me name it.
ANNE  Some dungeon.
RICHARD  Your bedchamber.
ANNE
Ill rest betide the chamber where thou liest!
RICHARD
So will it, madam, till I lie with you.
ANNE
I hope so.
RICHARD  I know so. But, gentle Lady Anne,
To leave this keen encounter of our wits
And fall something into a slower method:
Is not the causer of the timeless deaths
Of these Plantagenets, Henry and Edward,
As blameful as the executioner?
ANNE
Thou wast the cause and most accursed effect.
RICHARD
Your beauty was the cause of that effect—
Your beauty, that did haunt me in my sleep
To undertake the death of all the world,
So I might live one hour in your sweet bosom.
ANNE
If I thought that, I tell thee, homicide,
These nails should rend that beauty from my
cheeks.
RICHARD
These eyes could not endure that beauty’s wrack.
You should not blemish it, if I stood by.
As all the world is cheerèd by the sun,
So I by that. It is my day, my life.
ANNE
Black night o’ershade thy day, and death thy life.
RICHARD
Curse not thyself, fair creature; thou art both.
ANNE
I would I were, to be revenged on thee.
RICHARD
It is a quarrel most unnatural
To be revenged on him that loveth thee.
ANNE
It is a quarrel just and reasonable
To be revenged on him that killed my husband.
RICHARD
He that bereft thee, lady, of thy husband
Did it to help thee to a better husband.
ANNE
His better doth not breathe upon the earth.
RICHARD
He lives that loves thee better than he could.
ANNE
Name him.
RICHARD  Plantagenet.
ANNE  Why, that was he.
RICHARD
The selfsame name, but one of better nature.
ANNE
Where is he?
RICHARD  Here. (She spits at him.) Why dost
thou spit at me?
ANNE
Would it were mortal poison for thy sake.
RICHARD
Never came poison from so sweet a place.
ANNE
Never hung poison on a fouler toad.
Out of my sight! Thou dost infect mine eyes.
RICHARD
Thine eyes, sweet lady, have infected mine.
ANNE
Would they were basilisks’ to strike thee dead.
RICHARD
I would they were, that I might die at once,
For now they kill me with a living death.
Those eyes of thine from mine have drawn salt
tears,
Shamed their aspects with store of childish drops.
These eyes, which never shed remorseful tear—
No, when my father York and Edward wept
To hear the piteous moan that Rutland made
When black-faced Clifford shook his sword at him;
Nor when thy warlike father, like a child,
Told the sad story of my father’s death
And twenty times made pause to sob and weep,
That all the standers-by had wet their cheeks
Like trees bedashed with rain—in that sad time,
My manly eyes did scorn an humble tear;
And what these sorrows could not thence exhale
Thy beauty hath, and made them blind with
weeping.
I never sued to friend nor enemy;
My tongue could never learn sweet smoothing word.
But now thy beauty is proposed my fee,
My proud heart sues and prompts my tongue to
speak.                                                  	She looks scornfully at him.
Teach not thy lip such scorn, for it was made
For kissing, lady, not for such contempt.
If thy revengeful heart cannot forgive,
Lo, here I lend thee this sharp-pointed sword,
Which if thou please to hide in this true breast
And let the soul forth that adoreth thee,
I lay it naked to the deadly stroke
And humbly beg the death upon my knee.
He kneels and lays his breast open;
she offers at it with his sword.
Nay, do not pause, for I did kill King Henry—
But ’twas thy beauty that provokèd me.
Nay, now dispatch; ’twas I that stabbed young
Edward—
But ’twas thy heavenly face that set me on.
She falls the sword.
Take up the sword again, or take up me.
ANNE
Arise, dissembler. Though I wish thy death,
I will not be thy executioner.
RICHARD, rising
Then bid me kill myself, and I will do it.
ANNE
I have already.
RICHARD  That was in thy rage.
Speak it again and, even with the word,
This hand, which for thy love did kill thy love,
Shall for thy love kill a far truer love.
To both their deaths shalt thou be accessory.
ANNE  I would I knew thy heart.
RICHARD  ’Tis figured in my tongue.
ANNE  I fear me both are false.
RICHARD  Then never was man true.
ANNE  Well, well, put up your sword.
RICHARD  Say then my peace is made.
ANNE  That shalt thou know hereafter.
RICHARD  But shall I live in hope?
ANNE  All men I hope live so.
RICHARD  Vouchsafe to wear this ring.
ANNE  To take is not to give.
He places the ring on her hand.
RICHARD
Look how my ring encompasseth thy finger;
Even so thy breast encloseth my poor heart.
Wear both of them, for both of them are thine.
And if thy poor devoted servant may
But beg one favor at thy gracious hand,
Thou dost confirm his happiness forever.
ANNE  What is it?
RICHARD
That it may please you leave these sad designs
To him that hath most cause to be a mourner,
And presently repair to Crosby House,
Where, after I have solemnly interred
At Chertsey monast’ry this noble king
And wet his grave with my repentant tears,
I will with all expedient duty see you.
For divers unknown reasons, I beseech you,
Grant me this boon.
ANNE
With all my heart, and much it joys me too
To see you are become so penitent.—
Tressel and Berkeley, go along with me.
RICHARD
Bid me farewell.
ANNE  ’Tis more than you deserve;
But since you teach me how to flatter you,
Imagine I have said “farewell” already.
Two exit with Anne. The bier is taken up.
GENTLEMAN  Towards Chertsey, noble lord?
RICHARD
No, to Whitefriars. There attend my coming.
Halberds and gentlemen exit with corse.
Was ever woman in this humor wooed?
Was ever woman in this humor won?
I’ll have her, but I will not keep her long.
What, I that killed her husband and his father,
To take her in her heart’s extremest hate,
With curses in her mouth, tears in her eyes,
The bleeding witness of my hatred by,
Having God, her conscience, and these bars against
me,
And I no friends to back my suit at all
But the plain devil and dissembling looks?
And yet to win her, all the world to nothing!
Ha!
Hath she forgot already that brave prince,
Edward, her lord, whom I some three months since
Stabbed in my angry mood at Tewkesbury?
A sweeter and a lovelier gentleman,
Framed in the prodigality of nature,
Young, valiant, wise, and, no doubt, right royal,
The spacious world cannot again afford.
And will she yet abase her eyes on me,
That cropped the golden prime of this sweet prince
And made her widow to a woeful bed?
On me, whose all not equals Edward’s moiety?
On me, that halts and am misshapen thus?
My dukedom to a beggarly denier,
I do mistake my person all this while!
Upon my life, she finds, although I cannot,
Myself to be a marv’lous proper man.
I’ll be at charges for a looking glass
And entertain a score or two of tailors
To study fashions to adorn my body.
Since I am crept in favor with myself,
I will maintain it with some little cost.
But first I’ll turn yon fellow in his grave
And then return lamenting to my love.
Shine out, fair sun, till I have bought a glass,
That I may see my shadow as I pass.
He exits.
 
Scene 3
Enter Queen Elizabeth, the Lord Marquess of Dorset,
Lord Rivers, and Lord Grey.
 
RIVERS
Have patience, madam. There’s no doubt his
Majesty
Will soon recover his accustomed health.
GREY
In that you brook it ill, it makes him worse.
Therefore, for God’s sake, entertain good comfort
And cheer his Grace with quick and merry eyes.
QUEEN ELIZABETH
If he were dead, what would betide on me?
GREY
No other harm but loss of such a lord.
QUEEN ELIZABETH
The loss of such a lord includes all harms.
GREY
The heavens have blessed you with a goodly son
To be your comforter when he is gone.
QUEEN ELIZABETH
Ah, he is young, and his minority
Is put unto the trust of Richard Gloucester,
A man that loves not me nor none of you.
RIVERS
Is it concluded he shall be Protector?
QUEEN ELIZABETH
It is determined, not concluded yet;
But so it must be if the King miscarry.
 
Enter Buckingham and Lord Stanley, Earl of Derby.
 
GREY
Here comes the lord of Buckingham, and Derby.
BUCKINGHAM, to Queen Elizabeth
Good time of day unto your royal Grace.
STANLEY
God make your Majesty joyful, as you have been.
QUEEN ELIZABETH
The Countess Richmond, good my lord of Derby,
To your good prayer will scarcely say amen.
Yet, Derby, notwithstanding she’s your wife
And loves not me, be you, good lord, assured
I hate not you for her proud arrogance.
STANLEY
I do beseech you either not believe
The envious slanders of her false accusers,
Or if she be accused on true report,
Bear with her weakness, which I think proceeds
From wayward sickness and no grounded malice.
QUEEN ELIZABETH
Saw you the King today, my lord of Derby?
STANLEY
But now the Duke of Buckingham and I
Are come from visiting his Majesty.
QUEEN ELIZABETH
What likelihood of his amendment, lords?
BUCKINGHAM
Madam, good hope. His Grace speaks cheerfully.
QUEEN ELIZABETH
God grant him health. Did you confer with him?
BUCKINGHAM
Ay, madam. He desires to make atonement
Between the Duke of Gloucester and your brothers,
And between them and my Lord Chamberlain,
And sent to warn them to his royal presence.
QUEEN ELIZABETH
Would all were well—but that will never be.
I fear our happiness is at the height.
 
Enter Richard, Duke of Gloucester, and Hastings.
 
RICHARD
They do me wrong, and I will not endure it!
Who is it that complains unto the King
That I, forsooth, am stern and love them not?
By holy Paul, they love his Grace but lightly
That fill his ears with such dissentious rumors.
Because I cannot flatter and look fair,
Smile in men’s faces, smooth, deceive, and cog,
Duck with French nods and apish courtesy,
I must be held a rancorous enemy.
Cannot a plain man live and think no harm,
But thus his simple truth must be abused
With silken, sly, insinuating Jacks?
GREY
To who in all this presence speaks your Grace?
RICHARD
To thee, that hast nor honesty nor grace.
When have I injured thee? When done thee
wrong?—
Or thee?—Or thee? Or any of your faction?
A plague upon you all! His royal Grace,
Whom God preserve better than you would wish,
Cannot be quiet scarce a breathing while
But you must trouble him with lewd complaints.
QUEEN ELIZABETH
Brother of Gloucester, you mistake the matter.
The King, on his own royal disposition,
And not provoked by any suitor else,
Aiming belike at your interior hatred
That in your outward action shows itself
Against my children, brothers, and myself,
Makes him to send, that he may learn the ground.
RICHARD
I cannot tell. The world is grown so bad
That wrens make prey where eagles dare not perch.
Since every Jack became a gentleman,
There’s many a gentle person made a Jack.
QUEEN ELIZABETH
Come, come, we know your meaning, brother
Gloucester.
You envy my advancement, and my friends’.
God grant we never may have need of you.
RICHARD
Meantime God grants that we have need of
you.
Our brother is imprisoned by your means,
Myself disgraced, and the nobility
Held in contempt, while great promotions
Are daily given to ennoble those
That scarce some two days since were worth a
noble.
QUEEN ELIZABETH
By Him that raised me to this careful height
From that contented hap which I enjoyed,
I never did incense his Majesty
Against the Duke of Clarence, but have been
An earnest advocate to plead for him.
My lord, you do me shameful injury
Falsely to draw me in these vile suspects.
RICHARD
You may deny that you were not the mean
Of my Lord Hastings’ late imprisonment.
RIVERS  She may, my lord, for—
RICHARD
She may, Lord Rivers. Why, who knows not so?
She may do more, sir, than denying that.
She may help you to many fair preferments
And then deny her aiding hand therein,
And lay those honors on your high desert.
What may she not? She may, ay, marry, may she—
RIVERS  What, marry, may she?
RICHARD
What, marry, may she? Marry with a king,
A bachelor, and a handsome stripling too.
Iwis, your grandam had a worser match.
QUEEN ELIZABETH
My lord of Gloucester, I have too long borne
Your blunt upbraidings and your bitter scoffs.
By heaven, I will acquaint his Majesty
Of those gross taunts that oft I have endured.
I had rather be a country servant-maid
Than a great queen with this condition,
To be so baited, scorned, and stormèd at.
 
Enter old Queen Margaret, apart from the others.
 
Small joy have I in being England’s queen.
QUEEN MARGARET, aside
And lessened be that small, God I beseech Him!
Thy honor, state, and seat is due to me.
RICHARD, to Queen Elizabeth
What, threat you me with telling of the King?
Tell him and spare not. Look, what I have said,
I will avouch ’t in presence of the King;
I dare adventure to be sent to th’ Tower.
’Tis time to speak. My pains are quite forgot.
QUEEN MARGARET, aside
Out, devil! I do remember them too well:
Thou killed’st my husband Henry in the Tower,
And Edward, my poor son, at Tewkesbury.
RICHARD, to Queen Elizabeth
Ere you were queen, ay, or your husband king,
I was a packhorse in his great affairs,
A weeder-out of his proud adversaries,
A liberal rewarder of his friends.
To royalize his blood, I spent mine own.
QUEEN MARGARET, aside
Ay, and much better blood than his or thine.
RICHARD, to Queen Elizabeth
In all which time, you and your husband Grey
Were factious for the House of Lancaster.—
And, Rivers, so were you.—Was not your husband
In Margaret’s battle at Saint Albans slain?
Let me put in your minds, if you forget,
What you have been ere this, and what you are;
Withal, what I have been, and what I am.
QUEEN MARGARET, aside
A murd’rous villain, and so still thou art.
RICHARD, to Queen Elizabeth
Poor Clarence did forsake his father Warwick,
Ay, and forswore himself—which Jesu pardon!—
QUEEN MARGARET, aside  Which God revenge!
RICHARD
To fight on Edward’s party for the crown;
And for his meed, poor lord, he is mewed up.
I would to God my heart were flint, like Edward’s,
Or Edward’s soft and pitiful, like mine.
I am too childish-foolish for this world.
QUEEN MARGARET, aside
Hie thee to hell for shame, and leave this world,
Thou cacodemon! There thy kingdom is.
RIVERS
My lord of Gloucester, in those busy days
Which here you urge to prove us enemies,
We followed then our lord, our sovereign king.
So should we you, if you should be our king.
RICHARD
If I should be? I had rather be a peddler.
Far be it from my heart, the thought thereof.
QUEEN ELIZABETH
As little joy, my lord, as you suppose
You should enjoy were you this country’s king,
As little joy you may suppose in me
That I enjoy, being the queen thereof.
QUEEN MARGARET, aside
As little joy enjoys the queen thereof,
For I am she, and altogether joyless.
I can no longer hold me patient.
She steps forward.
Hear me, you wrangling pirates, that fall out
In sharing that which you have pilled from me!
Which of you trembles not that looks on me?
If not, that I am queen, you bow like subjects,
Yet that, by you deposed, you quake like rebels.—
Ah, gentle villain, do not turn away.
RICHARD
Foul, wrinkled witch, what mak’st thou in my
sight?
QUEEN MARGARET
But repetition of what thou hast marred.
That will I make before I let thee go.
RICHARD
Wert thou not banishèd on pain of death?
QUEEN MARGARET
I was, but I do find more pain in banishment
Than death can yield me here by my abode.
A husband and a son thou ow’st to me;
To Queen Elizabeth. And thou a kingdom;—all
of you, allegiance.
This sorrow that I have by right is yours,
And all the pleasures you usurp are mine.
RICHARD
The curse my noble father laid on thee
When thou didst crown his warlike brows with
paper,
And with thy scorns drew’st rivers from his eyes,
And then, to dry them, gav’st the Duke a clout
Steeped in the faultless blood of pretty Rutland—
His curses then, from bitterness of soul
Denounced against thee, are all fall’n upon thee,
And God, not we, hath plagued thy bloody deed.
QUEEN ELIZABETH
So just is God to right the innocent.
HASTINGS
O, ’twas the foulest deed to slay that babe,
And the most merciless that e’er was heard of!
RIVERS
Tyrants themselves wept when it was reported.
DORSET
No man but prophesied revenge for it.
BUCKINGHAM
Northumberland, then present, wept to see it.
QUEEN MARGARET
What, were you snarling all before I came,
Ready to catch each other by the throat,
And turn you all your hatred now on me?
Did York’s dread curse prevail so much with
heaven
That Henry’s death, my lovely Edward’s death,
Their kingdom’s loss, my woeful banishment,
Should all but answer for that peevish brat?
Can curses pierce the clouds and enter heaven?
Why then, give way, dull clouds, to my quick
curses!
Though not by war, by surfeit die your king,
As ours by murder to make him a king.
To Queen Elizabeth. Edward thy son, that now is
Prince of Wales,
For Edward our son, that was Prince of Wales,
Die in his youth by like untimely violence.
Thyself a queen, for me that was a queen,
Outlive thy glory, like my wretched self.
Long mayst thou live to wail thy children’s death
And see another, as I see thee now,
Decked in thy rights, as thou art stalled in mine.
Long die thy happy days before thy death,
And, after many lengthened hours of grief,
Die neither mother, wife, nor England’s queen.—
Rivers and Dorset, you were standers-by,
And so wast thou, Lord Hastings, when my son
Was stabbed with bloody daggers. God I pray Him
That none of you may live his natural age,
But by some unlooked accident cut off.
RICHARD
Have done thy charm, thou hateful, withered hag.
QUEEN MARGARET
And leave out thee? Stay, dog, for thou shalt hear
me.
If heaven have any grievous plague in store
Exceeding those that I can wish upon thee,
O, let them keep it till thy sins be ripe
And then hurl down their indignation
On thee, the troubler of the poor world’s peace.
The worm of conscience still begnaw thy soul.
Thy friends suspect for traitors while thou liv’st,
And take deep traitors for thy dearest friends.
No sleep close up that deadly eye of thine,
Unless it be while some tormenting dream
Affrights thee with a hell of ugly devils.
Thou elvish-marked, abortive, rooting hog,
Thou that wast sealed in thy nativity
The slave of nature and the son of hell,
Thou slander of thy heavy mother’s womb,
Thou loathèd issue of thy father’s loins,
Thou rag of honor, thou detested—
RICHARD  Margaret.
QUEEN MARGARET  Richard!
RICHARD  Ha?
QUEEN MARGARET  I call thee not.
RICHARD
I cry thee mercy, then, for I did think
That thou hadst called me all these bitter names.
QUEEN MARGARET
Why, so I did, but looked for no reply.
O, let me make the period to my curse!
RICHARD
’Tis done by me and ends in “Margaret.”
QUEEN ELIZABETH, to Queen Margaret
Thus have you breathed your curse against yourself.
QUEEN MARGARET
Poor painted queen, vain flourish of my fortune,
Why strew’st thou sugar on that bottled spider,
Whose deadly web ensnareth thee about?
Fool, fool, thou whet’st a knife to kill thyself.
The day will come that thou shalt wish for me
To help thee curse this poisonous bunch-backed
toad.
HASTINGS
False-boding woman, end thy frantic curse,
Lest to thy harm thou move our patience.
QUEEN MARGARET
Foul shame upon you, you have all moved mine.
RIVERS
Were you well served, you would be taught your
duty.
QUEEN MARGARET
To serve me well, you all should do me duty:
Teach me to be your queen, and you my subjects.
O, serve me well, and teach yourselves that duty!
DORSET, to Rivers
Dispute not with her; she is lunatic.
QUEEN MARGARET
Peace, Master Marquess, you are malapert.
Your fire-new stamp of honor is scarce current.
O, that your young nobility could judge
What ’twere to lose it and be miserable!
They that stand high have many blasts to shake
them,
And if they fall, they dash themselves to pieces.
RICHARD
Good counsel, marry.—Learn it, learn it, marquess.
DORSET
It touches you, my lord, as much as me.
RICHARD
Ay, and much more; but I was born so high.
Our aerie buildeth in the cedar’s top,
And dallies with the wind and scorns the sun.
QUEEN MARGARET
And turns the sun to shade. Alas, alas,
Witness my son, now in the shade of death,
Whose bright out-shining beams thy cloudy wrath
Hath in eternal darkness folded up.
Your aerie buildeth in our aerie’s nest.
O God, that seest it, do not suffer it!
As it is won with blood, lost be it so.
BUCKINGHAM
Peace, peace, for shame, if not for charity.
QUEEN MARGARET
Urge neither charity nor shame to me.
Addressing the others. Uncharitably with me have
you dealt,
And shamefully my hopes by you are butchered.
My charity is outrage, life my shame,
And in that shame still live my sorrows’ rage.
BUCKINGHAM  Have done, have done.
QUEEN MARGARET
O princely Buckingham, I’ll kiss thy hand
In sign of league and amity with thee.
Now fair befall thee and thy noble house!
Thy garments are not spotted with our blood,
Nor thou within the compass of my curse.
BUCKINGHAM
Nor no one here, for curses never pass
The lips of those that breathe them in the air.
QUEEN MARGARET
I will not think but they ascend the sky,
And there awake God’s gentle sleeping peace.
Aside to Buckingham. O Buckingham, take heed of
yonder dog!
Look when he fawns, he bites; and when he bites,
His venom tooth will rankle to the death.
Have not to do with him. Beware of him.
Sin, death, and hell have set their marks on him,
And all their ministers attend on him.
RICHARD
What doth she say, my lord of Buckingham?
BUCKINGHAM
Nothing that I respect, my gracious lord.
QUEEN MARGARET
What, dost thou scorn me for my gentle counsel,
And soothe the devil that I warn thee from?
O, but remember this another day,
When he shall split thy very heart with sorrow,
And say poor Margaret was a prophetess.—
Live each of you the subjects to his hate,
And he to yours, and all of you to God’s. She exits.
BUCKINGHAM
My hair doth stand an end to hear her curses.
RIVERS
And so doth mine. I muse why she’s at liberty.
RICHARD
I cannot blame her. By God’s holy mother,
She hath had too much wrong, and I repent
My part thereof that I have done to her.
QUEEN ELIZABETH
I never did her any, to my knowledge.
RICHARD
Yet you have all the vantage of her wrong.
I was too hot to do somebody good
That is too cold in thinking of it now.
Marry, as for Clarence, he is well repaid;
He is franked up to fatting for his pains.
God pardon them that are the cause thereof.
RIVERS
A virtuous and a Christian-like conclusion
To pray for them that have done scathe to us.
RICHARD
So do I ever—(speaks to himself) being well advised,
For had I cursed now, I had cursed myself.
 
Enter Catesby.
 
CATESBY
Madam, his Majesty doth call for you,—
And for your Grace,—and yours, my gracious
lords.
QUEEN ELIZABETH
Catesby, I come.—Lords, will you go with me?
RIVERS  We wait upon your Grace.
All but Richard, Duke of Gloucester exit.
RICHARD
I do the wrong and first begin to brawl.
The secret mischiefs that I set abroach
I lay unto the grievous charge of others.
Clarence, who I indeed have cast in darkness,
I do beweep to many simple gulls,
Namely, to Derby, Hastings, Buckingham,
And tell them ’tis the Queen and her allies
That stir the King against the Duke my brother.
Now they believe it and withal whet me
To be revenged on Rivers, Dorset, Grey;
But then I sigh and, with a piece of scripture,
Tell them that God bids us do good for evil;
And thus I clothe my naked villainy
With odd old ends stol’n forth of Holy Writ,
And seem a saint when most I play the devil.
 
Enter two Murderers.
 
But soft, here come my executioners.—
How now, my hardy, stout, resolvèd mates?
Are you now going to dispatch this thing?
MURDERER
We are, my lord, and come to have the warrant
That we may be admitted where he is.
RICHARD
Well thought upon. I have it here about me.
He gives a paper.
When you have done, repair to Crosby Place.
But, sirs, be sudden in the execution,
Withal obdurate; do not hear him plead,
For Clarence is well-spoken and perhaps
May move your hearts to pity if you mark him.
MURDERER
Tut, tut, my lord, we will not stand to prate.
Talkers are no good doers. Be assured
We go to use our hands and not our tongues.
RICHARD
Your eyes drop millstones when fools’ eyes fall
tears.
I like you lads. About your business straight.
Go, go, dispatch.
MURDERERS  We will, my noble lord.
They exit.
 
Scene 4
Enter Clarence and Keeper.
 
KEEPER
Why looks your Grace so heavily today?
CLARENCE
O, I have passed a miserable night,
So full of fearful dreams, of ugly sights,
That, as I am a Christian faithful man,
I would not spend another such a night
Though ’twere to buy a world of happy days,
So full of dismal terror was the time.
KEEPER
What was your dream, my lord? I pray you tell me.
CLARENCE
Methoughts that I had broken from the Tower
And was embarked to cross to Burgundy,
And in my company my brother Gloucester,
Who from my cabin tempted me to walk
Upon the hatches. Thence we looked toward
England
And cited up a thousand heavy times,
During the wars of York and Lancaster,
That had befall’n us. As we paced along
Upon the giddy footing of the hatches,
Methought that Gloucester stumbled, and in falling
Struck me, that thought to stay him, overboard
Into the tumbling billows of the main.
O Lord, methought what pain it was to drown,
What dreadful noise of waters in my ears,
What sights of ugly death within my eyes.
Methoughts I saw a thousand fearful wracks,
A thousand men that fishes gnawed upon,
Wedges of gold, great anchors, heaps of pearl,
Inestimable stones, unvalued jewels,
All scattered in the bottom of the sea.
Some lay in dead men’s skulls, and in the holes
Where eyes did once inhabit, there were crept—
As ’twere in scorn of eyes—reflecting gems,
That wooed the slimy bottom of the deep
And mocked the dead bones that lay scattered by.
KEEPER
Had you such leisure in the time of death
To gaze upon these secrets of the deep?
CLARENCE
Methought I had, and often did I strive
To yield the ghost, but still the envious flood
Stopped in my soul and would not let it forth
To find the empty, vast, and wand’ring air,
But smothered it within my panting bulk,
Who almost burst to belch it in the sea.
KEEPER
Awaked you not in this sore agony?
CLARENCE
No, no, my dream was lengthened after life.
O, then began the tempest to my soul.
I passed, methought, the melancholy flood,
With that sour ferryman which poets write of,
Unto the kingdom of perpetual night.
The first that there did greet my stranger-soul
Was my great father-in-law, renownèd Warwick,
Who spake aloud “What scourge for perjury
Can this dark monarchy afford false Clarence?”
And so he vanished. Then came wand’ring by
A shadow like an angel, with bright hair
Dabbled in blood, and he shrieked out aloud
“Clarence is come—false, fleeting, perjured
Clarence,
That stabbed me in the field by Tewkesbury.
Seize on him, furies. Take him unto torment.”
With that, methoughts, a legion of foul fiends
Environed me and howlèd in mine ears
Such hideous cries that with the very noise
I trembling waked, and for a season after
Could not believe but that I was in hell,
Such terrible impression made my dream.
KEEPER
No marvel, lord, though it affrighted you.
I am afraid, methinks, to hear you tell it.
CLARENCE
Ah keeper, keeper, I have done these things,
That now give evidence against my soul,
For Edward’s sake, and see how he requites me.—
O God, if my deep prayers cannot appease thee,
But thou wilt be avenged on my misdeeds,
Yet execute thy wrath in me alone!
O, spare my guiltless wife and my poor children!—
Keeper, I prithee sit by me awhile.
My soul is heavy, and I fain would sleep.
KEEPER
I will, my lord. God give your Grace good rest.
Clarence sleeps.
 
Enter Brakenbury the Lieutenant.
 
BRAKENBURY
Sorrow breaks seasons and reposing hours,
Makes the night morning, and the noontide night.
Princes have but their titles for their glories,
An outward honor for an inward toil,
And, for unfelt imaginations,
They often feel a world of restless cares,
So that between their titles and low name
There’s nothing differs but the outward fame.
 
Enter two Murderers.
 
FIRST MURDERER  Ho, who’s here?
BRAKENBURY
What wouldst thou, fellow? And how cam’st thou
hither?
SECOND MURDERER  I would speak with Clarence, and I
came hither on my legs.
BRAKENBURY  What, so brief?
FIRST MURDERER  ’Tis better, sir, than to be tedious.—
Let him see our commission, and talk no more.
Brakenbury reads the commission.
BRAKENBURY
I am in this commanded to deliver
The noble Duke of Clarence to your hands.
I will not reason what is meant hereby
Because I will be guiltless from the meaning.
There lies the Duke asleep, and there the keys.
He hands them keys.
I’ll to the King and signify to him
That thus I have resigned to you my charge.
FIRST MURDERER  You may, sir. ’Tis a point of wisdom.
Fare you well.
Brakenbury and the Keeper exit.
SECOND MURDERER  What, shall I stab him as he
sleeps?
FIRST MURDERER  No. He’ll say ’twas done cowardly,
when he wakes.
SECOND MURDERER  Why, he shall never wake until the
great Judgment Day.
FIRST MURDERER  Why, then he’ll say we stabbed him
sleeping.
SECOND MURDERER  The urging of that word “judgment”
hath bred a kind of remorse in me.
FIRST MURDERER  What, art thou afraid?
SECOND MURDERER  Not to kill him, having a warrant,
but to be damned for killing him, from the which
no warrant can defend me.
FIRST MURDERER  I thought thou hadst been resolute.
SECOND MURDERER  So I am—to let him live.
FIRST MURDERER  I’ll back to the Duke of Gloucester
and tell him so.
SECOND MURDERER  Nay, I prithee stay a little. I hope
this passionate humor of mine will change. It was
wont to hold me but while one tells twenty.
FIRST MURDERER  How dost thou feel thyself now?
SECOND MURDERER  Faith, some certain dregs of conscience
are yet within me.
FIRST MURDERER  Remember our reward when the
deed’s done.
SECOND MURDERER  Zounds, he dies! I had forgot the
reward.
FIRST MURDERER  Where’s thy conscience now?
SECOND MURDERER  O, in the Duke of Gloucester’s
purse.
FIRST MURDERER  When he opens his purse to give us
our reward, thy conscience flies out.
SECOND MURDERER  ’Tis no matter. Let it go. There’s
few or none will entertain it.
FIRST MURDERER  What if it come to thee again?
SECOND MURDERER  I’ll not meddle with it. It makes a
man a coward: a man cannot steal but it accuseth
him; a man cannot swear but it checks him; a man
cannot lie with his neighbor’s wife but it detects
him. ’Tis a blushing, shamefaced spirit that mutinies
in a man’s bosom. It fills a man full of
obstacles. It made me once restore a purse of gold
that by chance I found. It beggars any man that
keeps it. It is turned out of towns and cities for a
dangerous thing, and every man that means to live
well endeavors to trust to himself and live without it.
FIRST MURDERER  Zounds, ’tis even now at my elbow,
persuading me not to kill the Duke.
SECOND MURDERER  Take the devil in thy mind, and
believe him not. He would insinuate with thee but
to make thee sigh.
FIRST MURDERER  I am strong-framed. He cannot prevail
with me.
SECOND MURDERER  Spoke like a tall man that respects
thy reputation. Come, shall we fall to work?
FIRST MURDERER  Take him on the costard with the
hilts of thy sword, and then throw him into the
malmsey butt in the next room.
SECOND MURDERER  O, excellent device—and make a
sop of him!
FIRST MURDERER  Soft, he wakes.
SECOND MURDERER  Strike!
FIRST MURDERER  No, we’ll reason with him.
Clarence wakes.
CLARENCE
Where art thou, keeper? Give me a cup of wine.
SECOND MURDERER
You shall have wine enough, my lord, anon.
CLARENCE
In God’s name, what art thou?
FIRST MURDERER  A man, as you are.
CLARENCE  But not, as I am, royal.
FIRST MURDERER  Nor you, as we are, loyal.
CLARENCE
Thy voice is thunder, but thy looks are humble.
FIRST MURDERER
My voice is now the King’s, my looks mine own.
CLARENCE
How darkly and how deadly dost thou speak!
Your eyes do menace me. Why look you pale?
Who sent you hither? Wherefore do you come?
SECOND MURDERER  To, to, to—
CLARENCE  To murder me?
BOTH  Ay, ay.
CLARENCE
You scarcely have the hearts to tell me so
And therefore cannot have the hearts to do it.
Wherein, my friends, have I offended you?
FIRST MURDERER
Offended us you have not, but the King.
CLARENCE
I shall be reconciled to him again.
SECOND MURDERER
Never, my lord. Therefore prepare to die.
CLARENCE
Are you drawn forth among a world of men
To slay the innocent? What is my offense?
Where is the evidence that doth accuse me?
What lawful quest have given their verdict up
Unto the frowning judge? Or who pronounced
The bitter sentence of poor Clarence’ death
Before I be convict by course of law?
To threaten me with death is most unlawful.
I charge you, as you hope to have redemption,
By Christ’s dear blood shed for our grievous sins,
That you depart, and lay no hands on me.
The deed you undertake is damnable.
FIRST MURDERER
What we will do, we do upon command.
SECOND MURDERER
And he that hath commanded is our king.
CLARENCE
Erroneous vassals, the great King of kings
Hath in the table of His law commanded
That thou shalt do no murder. Will you then
Spurn at His edict and fulfill a man’s?
Take heed, for He holds vengeance in His hand
To hurl upon their heads that break His law.
SECOND MURDERER
And that same vengeance doth He hurl on thee
For false forswearing and for murder too.
Thou didst receive the sacrament to fight
In quarrel of the House of Lancaster.
FIRST MURDERER
And, like a traitor to the name of God,
Didst break that vow, and with thy treacherous
blade
Unrippedst the bowels of thy sovereign’s son.
SECOND MURDERER
Whom thou wast sworn to cherish and defend.
FIRST MURDERER
How canst thou urge God’s dreadful law to us
When thou hast broke it in such dear degree?
CLARENCE
Alas! For whose sake did I that ill deed?
For Edward, for my brother, for his sake.
He sends you not to murder me for this,
For in that sin he is as deep as I.
If God will be avengèd for the deed,
O, know you yet He doth it publicly!
Take not the quarrel from His powerful arm;
He needs no indirect or lawless course
To cut off those that have offended Him.
FIRST MURDERER
Who made thee then a bloody minister
When gallant-springing, brave Plantagenet,
That princely novice, was struck dead by thee?
CLARENCE
My brother’s love, the devil, and my rage.
FIRST MURDERER
Thy brother’s love, our duty, and thy faults
Provoke us hither now to slaughter thee.
CLARENCE
If you do love my brother, hate not me.
I am his brother, and I love him well.
If you are hired for meed, go back again,
And I will send you to my brother Gloucester,
Who shall reward you better for my life
Than Edward will for tidings of my death.
SECOND MURDERER
You are deceived. Your brother Gloucester hates
you.
CLARENCE
O no, he loves me, and he holds me dear.
Go you to him from me.
FIRST MURDERER  Ay, so we will.
CLARENCE
Tell him, when that our princely father York
Blessed his three sons with his victorious arm,
He little thought of this divided friendship.
Bid Gloucester think of this, and he will weep.
FIRST MURDERER
Ay, millstones, as he lessoned us to weep.
CLARENCE
O, do not slander him, for he is kind.
FIRST MURDERER
Right, as snow in harvest. Come, you deceive
yourself.
’Tis he that sends us to destroy you here.
CLARENCE
It cannot be, for he bewept my fortune,
And hugged me in his arms, and swore with sobs
That he would labor my delivery.
FIRST MURDERER
Why, so he doth, when he delivers you
From this Earth’s thralldom to the joys of heaven.
SECOND MURDERER
Make peace with God, for you must die, my lord.
CLARENCE
Have you that holy feeling in your souls
To counsel me to make my peace with God,
And are you yet to your own souls so blind
That you will war with God by murd’ring me?
O sirs, consider: they that set you on
To do this deed will hate you for the deed.
SECOND MURDERER, to First Murderer
What shall we do?
CLARENCE  Relent, and save your souls.
Which of you—if you were a prince’s son
Being pent from liberty, as I am now—
If two such murderers as yourselves came to you,
Would not entreat for life? Ay, you would beg,
Were you in my distress.
FIRST MURDERER
Relent? No. ’Tis cowardly and womanish.
CLARENCE
Not to relent is beastly, savage, devilish.
To Second Murderer. My friend, I spy some pity
in thy looks.
O, if thine eye be not a flatterer,
Come thou on my side and entreat for me.
A begging prince what beggar pities not?
SECOND MURDERER  Look behind you, my lord.
FIRST MURDERER
Take that, and that. (Stabs him.) If all this will not
do,
I’ll drown you in the malmsey butt within.
He exits with the body.
SECOND MURDERER
A bloody deed, and desperately dispatched.
How fain, like Pilate, would I wash my hands
Of this most grievous murder.
 
Enter First Murderer.
 
FIRST MURDERER
How now? What mean’st thou that thou help’st me
not?
By heavens, the Duke shall know how slack you
have been.
SECOND MURDERER
I would he knew that I had saved his brother.
Take thou the fee, and tell him what I say,
For I repent me that the Duke is slain.                                	He exits.
FIRST MURDERER
So do not I. Go, coward as thou art.
Well, I’ll go hide the body in some hole
Till that the Duke give order for his burial.
And when I have my meed, I will away,
For this will out, and then I must not stay.
He exits.
 
 
 

 
 
ACT 2
 
Scene 1
Flourish. Enter King Edward, sick, Queen Elizabeth,
Lord Marquess Dorset, Rivers, Hastings, Buckingham,
Woodeville, Grey, and Scales.
 
KING EDWARD
Why, so. Now have I done a good day’s work.
You peers, continue this united league.
I every day expect an embassage
From my Redeemer to redeem me hence,
And more in peace my soul shall part to heaven
Since I have made my friends at peace on Earth.
Rivers and Hastings, take each other’s hand.
Dissemble not your hatred. Swear your love.
RIVERS, taking Hastings’ hand
By heaven, my soul is purged from grudging hate,
And with my hand I seal my true heart’s love.
HASTINGS
So thrive I as I truly swear the like.
KING EDWARD
Take heed you dally not before your king,
Lest He that is the supreme King of kings
Confound your hidden falsehood and award
Either of you to be the other’s end.
HASTINGS
So prosper I as I swear perfect love.
RIVERS
And I as I love Hastings with my heart.
KING EDWARD, to Queen Elizabeth
Madam, yourself is not exempt from this,—
Nor you, son Dorset,—Buckingham, nor you.
You have been factious one against the other.—
Wife, love Lord Hastings. Let him kiss your hand,
And what you do, do it unfeignedly.
QUEEN ELIZABETH
There, Hastings, I will never more remember
Our former hatred, so thrive I and mine.
Hastings kisses her hand.
KING EDWARD
Dorset, embrace him.—Hastings, love Lord
Marquess.
DORSET
This interchange of love, I here protest,
Upon my part shall be inviolable.
HASTINGS  And so swear I.                                         	They embrace.
KING EDWARD
Now, princely Buckingham, seal thou this league
With thy embracements to my wife’s allies
And make me happy in your unity.
BUCKINGHAM, to Queen Elizabeth
Whenever Buckingham doth turn his hate
Upon your Grace, but with all duteous love
Doth cherish you and yours, God punish me
With hate in those where I expect most love.
When I have most need to employ a friend,
And most assurèd that he is a friend,
Deep, hollow, treacherous, and full of guile
Be he unto me: this do I beg of God,
When I am cold in love to you or yours.
Queen Elizabeth and Buckingham embrace.
KING EDWARD
A pleasing cordial, princely Buckingham,
Is this thy vow unto my sickly heart.
There wanteth now our brother Gloucester here
To make the blessèd period of this peace.
BUCKINGHAM  And in good time
Here comes Sir Richard Ratcliffe and the Duke.
 
Enter Ratcliffe, and Richard, Duke of Gloucester.
 
RICHARD
Good morrow to my sovereign king and queen,
And, princely peers, a happy time of day.
KING EDWARD
Happy indeed, as we have spent the day.
Gloucester, we have done deeds of charity,
Made peace of enmity, fair love of hate,
Between these swelling, wrong-incensèd peers.
RICHARD
A blessèd labor, my most sovereign lord.
Among this princely heap, if any here
By false intelligence or wrong surmise
Hold me a foe,
If I unwittingly, or in my rage,
Have aught committed that is hardly borne
By any in this presence, I desire
To reconcile me to his friendly peace.
’Tis death to me to be at enmity;
I hate it, and desire all good men’s love.
First, madam, I entreat true peace of you,
Which I will purchase with my duteous service;—
Of you, my noble cousin Buckingham,
If ever any grudge were lodged between us;—
Of you and you, Lord Rivers and of Dorset,
That all without desert have frowned on me;—
Of you, Lord Woodeville and Lord Scales;—of you,
Dukes, earls, lords, gentlemen; indeed, of all.
I do not know that Englishman alive
With whom my soul is any jot at odds
More than the infant that is born tonight.
I thank my God for my humility.
QUEEN ELIZABETH
A holy day shall this be kept hereafter.
I would to God all strifes were well compounded.
My sovereign lord, I do beseech your Highness
To take our brother Clarence to your grace.
RICHARD
Why, madam, have I offered love for this,
To be so flouted in this royal presence?
Who knows not that the gentle duke is dead?
They all start.
You do him injury to scorn his corse.
KING EDWARD
Who knows not he is dead! Who knows he is?
QUEEN ELIZABETH
All-seeing heaven, what a world is this!
BUCKINGHAM
Look I so pale, Lord Dorset, as the rest?
DORSET
Ay, my good lord, and no man in the presence
But his red color hath forsook his cheeks.
KING EDWARD
Is Clarence dead? The order was reversed.
RICHARD
But he, poor man, by your first order died,
And that a wingèd Mercury did bear.
Some tardy cripple bare the countermand,
That came too lag to see him burièd.
God grant that some, less noble and less loyal,
Nearer in bloody thoughts, and not in blood,
Deserve not worse than wretched Clarence did,
And yet go current from suspicion.
 
Enter Lord Stanley, Earl of Derby.
 
STANLEY, kneeling
A boon, my sovereign, for my service done.
KING EDWARD
I prithee, peace. My soul is full of sorrow.
STANLEY
I will not rise unless your Highness hear me.
KING EDWARD
Then say at once what is it thou requests.
STANLEY
The forfeit, sovereign, of my servant’s life,
Who slew today a riotous gentleman
Lately attendant on the Duke of Norfolk.
KING EDWARD
Have I a tongue to doom my brother’s death,
And shall that tongue give pardon to a slave?
My brother killed no man; his fault was thought,
And yet his punishment was bitter death.
Who sued to me for him? Who, in my wrath,
Kneeled at my feet, and bade me be advised?
Who spoke of brotherhood? Who spoke of love?
Who told me how the poor soul did forsake
The mighty Warwick and did fight for me?
Who told me, in the field at Tewkesbury,
When Oxford had me down, he rescued me,
And said “Dear brother, live, and be a king”?
Who told me, when we both lay in the field
Frozen almost to death, how he did lap me
Even in his garments and did give himself,
All thin and naked, to the numb-cold night?
All this from my remembrance brutish wrath
Sinfully plucked, and not a man of you
Had so much grace to put it in my mind.
But when your carters or your waiting vassals
Have done a drunken slaughter and defaced
The precious image of our dear Redeemer,
You straight are on your knees for pardon, pardon,
And I, unjustly too, must grant it you.
Stanley rises.
But for my brother, not a man would speak,
Nor I, ungracious, speak unto myself
For him, poor soul. The proudest of you all
Have been beholding to him in his life,
Yet none of you would once beg for his life.
O God, I fear Thy justice will take hold
On me and you, and mine and yours for this!—
Come, Hastings, help me to my closet.—
Ah, poor Clarence.
Some exit with King and Queen.
RICHARD
This is the fruits of rashness. Marked you not
How that the guilty kindred of the Queen
Looked pale when they did hear of Clarence’ death?
O, they did urge it still unto the King.
God will revenge it. Come, lords, will you go
To comfort Edward with our company?
BUCKINGHAM  We wait upon your Grace.
They exit.
 
Scene 2
Enter the old Duchess of York with the two
children of Clarence.
 
BOY
Good grandam, tell us, is our father dead?
DUCHESS  No, boy.
DAUGHTER
Why do you weep so oft, and beat your breast,
And cry “O Clarence, my unhappy son”?
BOY
Why do you look on us and shake your head,
And call us orphans, wretches, castaways,
If that our noble father were alive?
DUCHESS
My pretty cousins, you mistake me both.
I do lament the sickness of the King,
As loath to lose him, not your father’s death.
It were lost sorrow to wail one that’s lost.
BOY
Then, you conclude, my grandam, he is dead.
The King mine uncle is to blame for it.
God will revenge it, whom I will importune
With earnest prayers, all to that effect.
DAUGHTER  And so will I.
DUCHESS
Peace, children, peace. The King doth love you
well.
Incapable and shallow innocents,
You cannot guess who caused your father’s death.
BOY
Grandam, we can, for my good uncle Gloucester
Told me the King, provoked to it by the Queen,
Devised impeachments to imprison him;
And when my uncle told me so, he wept,
And pitied me, and kindly kissed my cheek,
Bade me rely on him as on my father,
And he would love me dearly as a child.
DUCHESS
Ah, that deceit should steal such gentle shape,
And with a virtuous visor hide deep vice.
He is my son, ay, and therein my shame,
Yet from my dugs he drew not this deceit.
BOY
Think you my uncle did dissemble, grandam?
DUCHESS  Ay, boy.
BOY
I cannot think it. Hark, what noise is this?
 
Enter Queen Elizabeth with her hair about her ears,
Rivers and Dorset after her.
 
QUEEN ELIZABETH
Ah, who shall hinder me to wail and weep,
To chide my fortune and torment myself?
I’ll join with black despair against my soul
And to myself become an enemy.
DUCHESS
What means this scene of rude impatience?
QUEEN ELIZABETH
To make an act of tragic violence.
Edward, my lord, thy son, our king, is dead.
Why grow the branches when the root is gone?
Why wither not the leaves that want their sap?
If you will live, lament. If die, be brief,
That our swift-wingèd souls may catch the King’s,
Or, like obedient subjects, follow him
To his new kingdom of ne’er-changing night.
DUCHESS
Ah, so much interest have I in thy sorrow
As I had title in thy noble husband.
I have bewept a worthy husband’s death
And lived with looking on his images;
But now two mirrors of his princely semblance
Are cracked in pieces by malignant death,
And I, for comfort, have but one false glass
That grieves me when I see my shame in him.
Thou art a widow, yet thou art a mother,
And hast the comfort of thy children left,
But death hath snatched my husband from mine
arms
And plucked two crutches from my feeble hands,
Clarence and Edward. O, what cause have I,
Thine being but a moiety of my moan,
To overgo thy woes and drown thy cries!
BOY, to Queen Elizabeth
Ah, aunt, you wept not for our father’s death.
How can we aid you with our kindred tears?
DAUGHTER, to Queen Elizabeth
Our fatherless distress was left unmoaned.
Your widow-dolor likewise be unwept!
QUEEN ELIZABETH
Give me no help in lamentation.
I am not barren to bring forth complaints.
All springs reduce their currents to mine eyes,
That I, being governed by the watery moon,
May send forth plenteous tears to drown the world.
Ah, for my husband, for my dear lord Edward!
CHILDREN
Ah, for our father, for our dear lord Clarence!
DUCHESS
Alas for both, both mine, Edward and Clarence!
QUEEN ELIZABETH
What stay had I but Edward? And he’s gone.
CHILDREN
What stay had we but Clarence? And he’s gone.
DUCHESS
What stays had I but they? And they are gone.
QUEEN ELIZABETH
Was never widow had so dear a loss.
CHILDREN
Were never orphans had so dear a loss.
DUCHESS
Was never mother had so dear a loss.
Alas, I am the mother of these griefs.
Their woes are parceled; mine is general.
She for an Edward weeps, and so do I;
I for a Clarence weep; so doth not she.
These babes for Clarence weep, and so do I;
I for an Edward weep; so do not they.
Alas, you three, on me, threefold distressed,
Pour all your tears. I am your sorrow’s nurse,
And I will pamper it with lamentation.
DORSET, to Queen Elizabeth
Comfort, dear mother. God is much displeased
That you take with unthankfulness His doing.
In common worldly things, ’tis called ungrateful
With dull unwillingness to repay a debt
Which with a bounteous hand was kindly lent;
Much more to be thus opposite with heaven,
For it requires the royal debt it lent you.
RIVERS
Madam, bethink you, like a careful mother,
Of the young prince your son. Send straight for
him.
Let him be crowned. In him your comfort lives.
Drown desperate sorrow in dead Edward’s grave
And plant your joys in living Edward’s throne.
 
Enter Richard, Duke of Gloucester, Buckingham, Lord
Stanley, Earl of Derby, Hastings, and Ratcliffe.
 
RICHARD, to Queen Elizabeth
Sister, have comfort. All of us have cause
To wail the dimming of our shining star,
But none can help our harms by wailing them.—
Madam my mother, I do cry you mercy;
I did not see your Grace. Humbly on my knee
I crave your blessing.                                                         	He kneels.
DUCHESS
God bless thee, and put meekness in thy breast,
Love, charity, obedience, and true duty.
RICHARD, standing
Amen. Aside. And make me die a good old man!
That is the butt end of a mother’s blessing;
I marvel that her Grace did leave it out.
BUCKINGHAM
You cloudy princes and heart-sorrowing peers
That bear this heavy mutual load of moan,
Now cheer each other in each other’s love.
Though we have spent our harvest of this king,
We are to reap the harvest of his son.
The broken rancor of your high-swoll’n hates,
But lately splintered, knit, and joined together,
Must gently be preserved, cherished, and kept.
Meseemeth good that with some little train
Forthwith from Ludlow the young prince be fet
Hither to London, to be crowned our king.
RIVERS
Why “with some little train,” my lord of
Buckingham?
BUCKINGHAM
Marry, my lord, lest by a multitude
The new-healed wound of malice should break out,
Which would be so much the more dangerous
By how much the estate is green and yet
ungoverned.
Where every horse bears his commanding rein
And may direct his course as please himself,
As well the fear of harm as harm apparent,
In my opinion, ought to be prevented.
RICHARD
I hope the King made peace with all of us;
And the compact is firm and true in me.
RIVERS
And so in me, and so, I think, in all.
Yet since it is but green, it should be put
To no apparent likelihood of breach,
Which haply by much company might be urged.
Therefore I say with noble Buckingham
That it is meet so few should fetch the Prince.
HASTINGS  And so say I.
RICHARD
Then be it so, and go we to determine
Who they shall be that straight shall post to
Ludlow.—
Madam, and you, my sister, will you go
To give your censures in this business?
All but Buckingham and Richard exit.
BUCKINGHAM
My lord, whoever journeys to the Prince,
For God’s sake let not us two stay at home.
For by the way I’ll sort occasion,
As index to the story we late talked of,
To part the Queen’s proud kindred from the Prince.
RICHARD
My other self, my council’s consistory,
My oracle, my prophet, my dear cousin,
I, as a child, will go by thy direction.
Toward Ludlow then, for we’ll not stay behind.
They exit.
 
Scene 3
Enter one Citizen at one door, and another at the other.
 
FIRST CITIZEN
Good morrow, neighbor, whither away so fast?
SECOND CITIZEN
I promise you I scarcely know myself.
Hear you the news abroad?
FIRST CITIZEN  Yes, that the King is dead.
SECOND CITIZEN
Ill news, by ’r Lady. Seldom comes the better.
I fear, I fear, ’twill prove a giddy world.
 
Enter another Citizen.
 
THIRD CITIZEN
Neighbors, God speed.
FIRST CITIZEN  Give you good morrow, sir.
THIRD CITIZEN
Doth the news hold of good King Edward’s death?
SECOND CITIZEN
Ay, sir, it is too true, God help the while.
THIRD CITIZEN
Then, masters, look to see a troublous world.
FIRST CITIZEN
No, no, by God’s good grace, his son shall reign.
THIRD CITIZEN
Woe to that land that’s governed by a child.
SECOND CITIZEN
In him there is a hope of government,
Which, in his nonage, council under him,
And, in his full and ripened years, himself,
No doubt shall then, and till then, govern well.
FIRST CITIZEN
So stood the state when Henry the Sixth
Was crowned in Paris but at nine months old.
THIRD CITIZEN
Stood the state so? No, no, good friends, God wot,
For then this land was famously enriched
With politic grave counsel; then the King
Had virtuous uncles to protect his Grace.
FIRST CITIZEN
Why, so hath this, both by his father and mother.
THIRD CITIZEN
Better it were they all came by his father,
Or by his father there were none at all,
For emulation who shall now be nearest
Will touch us all too near if God prevent not.
O, full of danger is the Duke of Gloucester,
And the Queen’s sons and brothers haught and
proud,
And were they to be ruled, and not to rule,
This sickly land might solace as before.
FIRST CITIZEN
Come, come, we fear the worst. All will be well.
THIRD CITIZEN
When clouds are seen, wise men put on their
cloaks;
When great leaves fall, then winter is at hand;
When the sun sets, who doth not look for night?
Untimely storms makes men expect a dearth.
All may be well; but if God sort it so,
’Tis more than we deserve or I expect.
SECOND CITIZEN
Truly, the hearts of men are full of fear.
You cannot reason almost with a man
That looks not heavily and full of dread.
THIRD CITIZEN
Before the days of change, still is it so.
By a divine instinct, men’s minds mistrust
Ensuing danger, as by proof we see
The water swell before a boist’rous storm.
But leave it all to God. Whither away?
SECOND CITIZEN
Marry, we were sent for to the Justices.
THIRD CITIZEN
And so was I. I’ll bear you company.
They exit.
 
Scene 4
Enter Archbishop, the young Duke of York,
Queen Elizabeth, and the Duchess of York.
 
ARCHBISHOP
Last night, I hear, they lay at Stony Stratford,
And at Northampton they do rest tonight.
Tomorrow or next day they will be here.
DUCHESS
I long with all my heart to see the Prince.
I hope he is much grown since last I saw him.
QUEEN ELIZABETH
But I hear no; they say my son of York
Has almost overta’en him in his growth.
YORK
Ay, mother, but I would not have it so.
DUCHESS
Why, my good cousin? It is good to grow.
YORK
Grandam, one night as we did sit at supper,
My uncle Rivers talked how I did grow
More than my brother. “Ay,” quoth my uncle
Gloucester,
“Small herbs have grace; great weeds do grow
apace.”
And since, methinks I would not grow so fast
Because sweet flowers are slow and weeds make
haste.
DUCHESS
Good faith, good faith, the saying did not hold
In him that did object the same to thee!
He was the wretched’st thing when he was young,
So long a-growing and so leisurely,
That if his rule were true, he should be gracious.
YORK
And so no doubt he is, my gracious madam.
DUCHESS
I hope he is, but yet let mothers doubt.
YORK
Now, by my troth, if I had been remembered,
I could have given my uncle’s Grace a flout
To touch his growth nearer than he touched mine.
DUCHESS
How, my young York? I prithee let me hear it.
YORK
Marry, they say my uncle grew so fast
That he could gnaw a crust at two hours old.
’Twas full two years ere I could get a tooth.
Grandam, this would have been a biting jest.
DUCHESS
I prithee, pretty York, who told thee this?
YORK  Grandam, his nurse.
DUCHESS
His nurse? Why, she was dead ere thou wast born.
YORK
If ’twere not she, I cannot tell who told me.
QUEEN ELIZABETH
A parlous boy! Go to, you are too shrewd.
DUCHESS
Good madam, be not angry with the child.
QUEEN ELIZABETH  Pitchers have ears.
 
Enter a Messenger.
 
ARCHBISHOP  Here comes a messenger.—What news?
MESSENGER
Such news, my lord, as grieves me to report.
QUEEN ELIZABETH  How doth the Prince?
MESSENGER  Well, madam, and in health.
DUCHESS  What is thy news?
MESSENGER
Lord Rivers and Lord Grey are sent to Pomfret,
And, with them, Sir Thomas Vaughan, prisoners.
DUCHESS  Who hath committed them?
MESSENGER
The mighty dukes, Gloucester and Buckingham.
ARCHBISHOP  For what offense?
MESSENGER
The sum of all I can, I have disclosed.
Why, or for what, the nobles were committed
Is all unknown to me, my gracious lord.
QUEEN ELIZABETH
Ay me! I see the ruin of my house.
The tiger now hath seized the gentle hind.
Insulting tyranny begins to jut
Upon the innocent and aweless throne.
Welcome, destruction, blood, and massacre.
I see, as in a map, the end of all.
DUCHESS
Accursèd and unquiet wrangling days,
How many of you have mine eyes beheld?
My husband lost his life to get the crown,
And often up and down my sons were tossed
For me to joy, and weep, their gain and loss.
And being seated, and domestic broils
Clean overblown, themselves the conquerors
Make war upon themselves, brother to brother,
Blood to blood, self against self. O, preposterous
And frantic outrage, end thy damnèd spleen,
Or let me die, to look on Earth no more.
QUEEN ELIZABETH, to York
Come, come, my boy. We will to sanctuary.—
Madam, farewell.
DUCHESS  Stay, I will go with you.
QUEEN ELIZABETH
You have no cause.
ARCHBISHOP, to Queen Elizabeth  My gracious lady, go,
And thither bear your treasure and your goods.
For my part, I’ll resign unto your Grace
The seal I keep; and so betide to me
As well I tender you and all of yours.
Go. I’ll conduct you to the sanctuary.
They exit.
 
 
 

 
 
ACT 3
 
Scene 1
The trumpets sound. Enter young Prince Edward,
Richard Duke of Gloucester, Buckingham,
the Cardinal, Catesby, and others.
 
BUCKINGHAM
Welcome, sweet prince, to London, to your chamber.
RICHARD, to Prince
Welcome, dear cousin, my thoughts’ sovereign.
The weary way hath made you melancholy.
PRINCE
No, uncle, but our crosses on the way
Have made it tedious, wearisome, and heavy.
I want more uncles here to welcome me.
RICHARD
Sweet prince, the untainted virtue of your years
Hath not yet dived into the world’s deceit;
Nor more can you distinguish of a man
Than of his outward show, which, God He knows,
Seldom or never jumpeth with the heart.
Those uncles which you want were dangerous.
Your Grace attended to their sugared words
But looked not on the poison of their hearts.
God keep you from them, and from such false
friends.
PRINCE
God keep me from false friends, but they were none.
RICHARD
My lord, the Mayor of London comes to greet you.
 
Enter Lord Mayor with others.
 
MAYOR
God bless your Grace with health and happy days.
PRINCE
I thank you, good my lord, and thank you all.—
I thought my mother and my brother York
Would long ere this have met us on the way.
Fie, what a slug is Hastings that he comes not
To tell us whether they will come or no!
 
Enter Lord Hastings.
 
BUCKINGHAM
And in good time here comes the sweating lord.
PRINCE
Welcome, my lord. What, will our mother come?
HASTINGS
On what occasion God He knows, not I,
The Queen your mother and your brother York
Have taken sanctuary. The tender prince
Would fain have come with me to meet your Grace,
But by his mother was perforce withheld.
BUCKINGHAM
Fie, what an indirect and peevish course
Is this of hers!—Lord Cardinal, will your Grace
Persuade the Queen to send the Duke of York
Unto his princely brother presently?—
If she deny, Lord Hastings, go with him,
And from her jealous arms pluck him perforce.
CARDINAL
My lord of Buckingham, if my weak oratory
Can from his mother win the Duke of York,
Anon expect him here; but if she be obdurate
To mild entreaties, God in heaven forbid
We should infringe the holy privilege
Of blessèd sanctuary! Not for all this land
Would I be guilty of so deep a sin.
BUCKINGHAM
You are too senseless obstinate, my lord,
Too ceremonious and traditional.
Weigh it but with the grossness of this age,
You break not sanctuary in seizing him.
The benefit thereof is always granted
To those whose dealings have deserved the place
And those who have the wit to claim the place.
This prince hath neither claimed it nor deserved it
And therefore, in mine opinion, cannot have it.
Then taking him from thence that is not there,
You break no privilege nor charter there.
Oft have I heard of sanctuary men,
But sanctuary children, never till now.
CARDINAL
My lord, you shall o’errule my mind for once.—
Come on, Lord Hastings, will you go with me?
HASTINGS  I go, my lord.
PRINCE
Good lords, make all the speedy haste you may.
The Cardinal and Hastings exit.
Say, uncle Gloucester, if our brother come,
Where shall we sojourn till our coronation?
RICHARD
Where it seems best unto your royal self.
If I may counsel you, some day or two
Your Highness shall repose you at the Tower;
Then where you please and shall be thought most fit
For your best health and recreation.
PRINCE
I do not like the Tower, of any place.—
Did Julius Caesar build that place, my lord?
BUCKINGHAM
He did, my gracious lord, begin that place,
Which, since, succeeding ages have re-edified.
PRINCE
Is it upon record, or else reported
Successively from age to age, he built it?
BUCKINGHAM  Upon record, my gracious lord.
PRINCE
But say, my lord, it were not registered,
Methinks the truth should live from age to age,
As ’twere retailed to all posterity,
Even to the general all-ending day.
RICHARD, aside
So wise so young, they say, do never live long.
PRINCE  What say you, uncle?
RICHARD
I say, without characters fame lives long.
Aside. Thus, like the formal Vice, Iniquity,
I moralize two meanings in one word.
PRINCE
That Julius Caesar was a famous man.
With what his valor did enrich his wit,
His wit set down to make his valor live.
Death makes no conquest of this conqueror,
For now he lives in fame, though not in life.
I’ll tell you what, my cousin Buckingham—
BUCKINGHAM  What, my gracious lord?
PRINCE
An if I live until I be a man,
I’ll win our ancient right in France again
Or die a soldier, as I lived a king.
RICHARD, aside
Short summers lightly have a forward spring.
 
Enter young Duke of York, Hastings, and the
Cardinal.
 
BUCKINGHAM
Now in good time here comes the Duke of York.
PRINCE
Richard of York, how fares our loving brother?
YORK
Well, my dread lord—so must I call you now.
PRINCE
Ay, brother, to our grief, as it is yours.
Too late he died that might have kept that title,
Which by his death hath lost much majesty.
RICHARD
How fares our cousin, noble lord of York?
YORK
I thank you, gentle uncle. O my lord,
You said that idle weeds are fast in growth.
The Prince my brother hath outgrown me far.
RICHARD
He hath, my lord.
YORK  And therefore is he idle?
RICHARD
O my fair cousin, I must not say so.
YORK
Then he is more beholding to you than I.
RICHARD
He may command me as my sovereign,
But you have power in me as in a kinsman.
YORK
I pray you, uncle, give me this dagger.
RICHARD
My dagger, little cousin? With all my heart.
PRINCE  A beggar, brother?
YORK
Of my kind uncle, that I know will give,
And being but a toy, which is no grief to give.
RICHARD
A greater gift than that I’ll give my cousin.
YORK
A greater gift? O, that’s the sword to it.
RICHARD
Ay, gentle cousin, were it light enough.
YORK
O, then I see you will part but with light gifts.
In weightier things you’ll say a beggar nay.
RICHARD
It is too heavy for your Grace to wear.
YORK
I weigh it lightly, were it heavier.
RICHARD
What, would you have my weapon, little lord?
YORK
I would, that I might thank you as you call me.
RICHARD  How?
YORK  Little.
PRINCE
My lord of York will still be cross in talk.
Uncle, your Grace knows how to bear with him.
YORK
You mean, to bear me, not to bear with me.—
Uncle, my brother mocks both you and me.
Because that I am little, like an ape,
He thinks that you should bear me on your
shoulders.
BUCKINGHAM, aside
With what a sharp-provided wit he reasons!
To mitigate the scorn he gives his uncle,
He prettily and aptly taunts himself.
So cunning and so young is wonderful.
RICHARD, to Prince
My lord, will ’t please you pass along?
Myself and my good cousin Buckingham
Will to your mother, to entreat of her
To meet you at the Tower and welcome you.
YORK, to Prince
What, will you go unto the Tower, my lord?
PRINCE
My Lord Protector needs will have it so.
YORK
I shall not sleep in quiet at the Tower.
RICHARD  Why, what should you fear?
YORK
Marry, my uncle Clarence’ angry ghost.
My grandam told me he was murdered there.
PRINCE  I fear no uncles dead.
RICHARD  Nor none that live, I hope.
PRINCE
An if they live, I hope I need not fear.
To York. But come, my lord. With a heavy heart,
Thinking on them, go I unto the Tower.
A sennet. Prince Edward, the Duke of York,
and Hastings exit. Richard, Buckingham,
and Catesby remain.
BUCKINGHAM, to Richard
Think you, my lord, this little prating York
Was not incensèd by his subtle mother
To taunt and scorn you thus opprobriously?
RICHARD
No doubt, no doubt. O, ’tis a parlous boy,
Bold, quick, ingenious, forward, capable.
He is all the mother’s, from the top to toe.
BUCKINGHAM
Well, let them rest.—Come hither, Catesby.
Thou art sworn as deeply to effect what we intend
As closely to conceal what we impart.
Thou knowest our reasons, urged upon the way.
What thinkest thou? Is it not an easy matter
To make William Lord Hastings of our mind
For the installment of this noble duke
In the seat royal of this famous isle?
CATESBY
He, for his father’s sake, so loves the Prince
That he will not be won to aught against him.
BUCKINGHAM
What think’st thou then of Stanley? Will not he?
CATESBY
He will do all in all as Hastings doth.
BUCKINGHAM
Well then, no more but this: go, gentle Catesby,
And, as it were far off, sound thou Lord Hastings
How he doth stand affected to our purpose
And summon him tomorrow to the Tower
To sit about the coronation.
If thou dost find him tractable to us,
Encourage him and tell him all our reasons.
If he be leaden, icy, cold, unwilling,
Be thou so too, and so break off the talk,
And give us notice of his inclination;
For we tomorrow hold divided councils,
Wherein thyself shalt highly be employed.
RICHARD
Commend me to Lord William. Tell him, Catesby,
His ancient knot of dangerous adversaries
Tomorrow are let blood at Pomfret Castle,
And bid my lord, for joy of this good news,
Give Mistress Shore one gentle kiss the more.
BUCKINGHAM
Good Catesby, go effect this business soundly.
CATESBY
My good lords both, with all the heed I can.
RICHARD
Shall we hear from you, Catesby, ere we sleep?
CATESBY  You shall, my lord.
RICHARD
At Crosby House, there shall you find us both.
Catesby exits.
BUCKINGHAM
Now, my lord, what shall we do if we perceive
Lord Hastings will not yield to our complots?
RICHARD
Chop off his head. Something we will determine.
And look when I am king, claim thou of me
The earldom of Hereford, and all the movables
Whereof the King my brother was possessed.
BUCKINGHAM
I’ll claim that promise at your Grace’s hand.
RICHARD
And look to have it yielded with all kindness.
Come, let us sup betimes, that afterwards
We may digest our complots in some form.
They exit.
 
Scene 2
Enter a Messenger to the door of Hastings.
 
MESSENGER, knocking  My lord, my lord.
HASTINGS, within  Who knocks?
MESSENGER  One from the Lord Stanley.
HASTINGS, within  What is ’t o’clock?
MESSENGER  Upon the stroke of four.
 
Enter Lord Hastings.
 
HASTINGS
Cannot my Lord Stanley sleep these tedious nights?
MESSENGER
So it appears by that I have to say.
First, he commends him to your noble self.
HASTINGS  What then?
MESSENGER
Then certifies your Lordship that this night
He dreamt the boar had razèd off his helm.
Besides, he says there are two councils kept,
And that may be determined at the one
Which may make you and him to rue at th’ other.
Therefore he sends to know your Lordship’s
pleasure,
If you will presently take horse with him
And with all speed post with him toward the north
To shun the danger that his soul divines.
HASTINGS
Go, fellow, go. Return unto thy lord.
Bid him not fear the separated council.
His Honor and myself are at the one,
And at the other is my good friend Catesby,
Where nothing can proceed that toucheth us
Whereof I shall not have intelligence.
Tell him his fears are shallow, without instance.
And for his dreams, I wonder he’s so simple
To trust the mock’ry of unquiet slumbers.
To fly the boar before the boar pursues
Were to incense the boar to follow us
And make pursuit where he did mean no chase.
Go, bid thy master rise and come to me,
And we will both together to the Tower,
Where he shall see the boar will use us kindly.
MESSENGER
I’ll go, my lord, and tell him what you say.                        	He exits.
 
Enter Catesby.
 
CATESBY
Many good morrows to my noble lord.
HASTINGS
Good morrow, Catesby. You are early stirring.
What news, what news in this our tott’ring state?
CATESBY
It is a reeling world indeed, my lord,
And I believe will never stand upright
Till Richard wear the garland of the realm.
HASTINGS
How “wear the garland”? Dost thou mean the
crown?
CATESBY  Ay, my good lord.
HASTINGS
I’ll have this crown of mine cut from my shoulders
Before I’ll see the crown so foul misplaced.
But canst thou guess that he doth aim at it?
CATESBY
Ay, on my life, and hopes to find you forward
Upon his party for the gain thereof;
And thereupon he sends you this good news,
That this same very day your enemies,
The kindred of the Queen, must die at Pomfret.
HASTINGS
Indeed, I am no mourner for that news,
Because they have been still my adversaries.
But that I’ll give my voice on Richard’s side
To bar my master’s heirs in true descent,
God knows I will not do it, to the death.
CATESBY
God keep your Lordship in that gracious mind.
HASTINGS
But I shall laugh at this a twelve-month hence,
That they which brought me in my master’s hate,
I live to look upon their tragedy.
Well, Catesby, ere a fortnight make me older
I’ll send some packing that yet think not on ’t.
CATESBY
’Tis a vile thing to die, my gracious lord,
When men are unprepared and look not for it.
HASTINGS
O monstrous, monstrous! And so falls it out
With Rivers, Vaughan, Grey; and so ’twill do
With some men else that think themselves as safe
As thou and I, who, as thou know’st, are dear
To princely Richard and to Buckingham.
CATESBY
The Princes both make high account of you—
Aside. For they account his head upon the Bridge.
HASTINGS
I know they do, and I have well deserved it.
 
Enter Lord Stanley.
 
Come on, come on. Where is your boar-spear, man?
Fear you the boar and go so unprovided?
STANLEY
My lord, good morrow.—Good morrow, Catesby.—
You may jest on, but, by the Holy Rood,
I do not like these several councils, I.
HASTINGS
My lord, I hold my life as dear as you do yours,
And never in my days, I do protest,
Was it so precious to me as ’tis now.
Think you but that I know our state secure,
I would be so triumphant as I am?
STANLEY
The lords at Pomfret, when they rode from London,
Were jocund and supposed their states were sure,
And they indeed had no cause to mistrust;
But yet you see how soon the day o’ercast.
This sudden stab of rancor I misdoubt.
Pray God, I say, I prove a needless coward!
What, shall we toward the Tower? The day is spent.
HASTINGS
Come, come. Have with you. Wot you what, my lord?
Today the lords you talked of are beheaded.
STANLEY
They, for their truth, might better wear their heads
Than some that have accused them wear their hats.
But come, my lord, let’s away.
 
Enter a Pursuivant.
 
HASTINGS
Go on before. I’ll talk with this good fellow.
Lord Stanley and Catesby exit.
How now, sirrah? How goes the world with thee?
PURSUIVANT
The better that your Lordship please to ask.
HASTINGS
I tell thee, man, ’tis better with me now
Than when thou met’st me last where now we meet.
Then was I going prisoner to the Tower
By the suggestion of the Queen’s allies.
But now, I tell thee—keep it to thyself—
This day those enemies are put to death,
And I in better state than e’er I was.
PURSUIVANT
God hold it, to your Honor’s good content!
HASTINGS
Gramercy, fellow. There, drink that for me.
Throws him his purse.
PURSUIVANT  I thank your Honor.                         	
Pursuivant exits.
 
Enter a Priest.
 
PRIEST
Well met, my lord. I am glad to see your Honor.
HASTINGS
I thank thee, good Sir John, with all my heart.
I am in your debt for your last exercise.
Come the next sabbath, and I will content you.
PRIEST  I’ll wait upon your Lordship.                              	
Priest exits.
 
Enter Buckingham.
 
BUCKINGHAM
What, talking with a priest, Lord Chamberlain?
Your friends at Pomfret, they do need the priest;
Your Honor hath no shriving work in hand.
HASTINGS
Good faith, and when I met this holy man,
The men you talk of came into my mind.
What, go you toward the Tower?
BUCKINGHAM
I do, my lord, but long I cannot stay there.
I shall return before your Lordship thence.
HASTINGS
Nay, like enough, for I stay dinner there.
BUCKINGHAM, aside
And supper too, although thou know’st it not.—
Come, will you go?
HASTINGS  I’ll wait upon your Lordship.
They exit.
 
Scene 3
Enter Sir Richard Ratcliffe, with Halberds, carrying the
nobles Rivers, Grey, and Vaughan to death at Pomfret.
 
RIVERS
Sir Richard Ratcliffe, let me tell thee this:
Today shalt thou behold a subject die
For truth, for duty, and for loyalty.
GREY, to Ratcliffe
God bless the Prince from all the pack of you!
A knot you are of damnèd bloodsuckers.
VAUGHAN, to Ratcliffe
You live that shall cry woe for this hereafter.
RATCLIFFE
Dispatch. The limit of your lives is out.
RIVERS
O Pomfret, Pomfret! O thou bloody prison,
Fatal and ominous to noble peers!
Within the guilty closure of thy walls,
Richard the Second here was hacked to death,
And, for more slander to thy dismal seat,
We give to thee our guiltless blood to drink.
GREY
Now Margaret’s curse is fall’n upon our heads,
When she exclaimed on Hastings, you, and I,
For standing by when Richard stabbed her son.
RIVERS
Then cursed she Richard. Then cursed she
Buckingham.
Then cursed she Hastings. O, remember, God,
To hear her prayer for them as now for us!
And for my sister and her princely sons,
Be satisfied, dear God, with our true blood,
Which, as thou know’st, unjustly must be spilt.
RATCLIFFE
Make haste. The hour of death is expiate.
RIVERS
Come, Grey. Come, Vaughan. Let us here embrace.
They embrace.
Farewell until we meet again in heaven.
They exit.
 
Scene 4
Enter Buckingham, Lord Stanley, Earl of Derby,
Hastings, Bishop of Ely, Norfolk, Ratcliffe, Lovell, with
others, at a table.
 
HASTINGS
Now, noble peers, the cause why we are met
Is to determine of the coronation.
In God’s name, speak. When is the royal day?
BUCKINGHAM
Is all things ready for the royal time?
STANLEY
It is, and wants but nomination.
ELY
Tomorrow, then, I judge a happy day.
BUCKINGHAM
Who knows the Lord Protector’s mind herein?
Who is most inward with the noble duke?
ELY
Your Grace, we think, should soonest know his
mind.
BUCKINGHAM
We know each other’s faces; for our hearts,
He knows no more of mine than I of yours,
Or I of his, my lord, than you of mine.—
Lord Hastings, you and he are near in love.
HASTINGS
I thank his Grace, I know he loves me well.
But for his purpose in the coronation,
I have not sounded him, nor he delivered
His gracious pleasure any way therein.
But you, my honorable lords, may name the time,
And in the Duke’s behalf I’ll give my voice,
Which I presume he’ll take in gentle part.
 
Enter Richard, Duke of Gloucester.
 
ELY
In happy time here comes the Duke himself.
RICHARD
My noble lords and cousins all, good morrow.
I have been long a sleeper; but I trust
My absence doth neglect no great design
Which by my presence might have been concluded.
BUCKINGHAM
Had you not come upon your cue, my lord,
William Lord Hastings had pronounced your part—
I mean your voice for crowning of the King.
RICHARD
Than my Lord Hastings no man might be bolder.
His Lordship knows me well and loves me well.—
My lord of Ely, when I was last in Holborn
I saw good strawberries in your garden there;
I do beseech you, send for some of them.
ELY
Marry and will, my lord, with all my heart.
Exit Bishop of Ely.
RICHARD
Cousin of Buckingham, a word with you.
They move aside.
Catesby hath sounded Hastings in our business
And finds the testy gentleman so hot
That he will lose his head ere give consent
His master’s child, as worshipfully he terms it,
Shall lose the royalty of England’s throne.
BUCKINGHAM
Withdraw yourself awhile. I’ll go with you.
Richard and Buckingham exit.
STANLEY
We have not yet set down this day of triumph.
Tomorrow, in my judgment, is too sudden,
For I myself am not so well provided
As else I would be, were the day prolonged.
 
Enter the Bishop of Ely.
 
ELY
Where is my lord the Duke of Gloucester?
I have sent for these strawberries.
HASTINGS
His Grace looks cheerfully and smooth this
morning.
There’s some conceit or other likes him well
When that he bids good morrow with such spirit.
I think there’s never a man in Christendom
Can lesser hide his love or hate than he,
For by his face straight shall you know his heart.
STANLEY
What of his heart perceive you in his face
By any livelihood he showed today?
HASTINGS
Marry, that with no man here he is offended,
For were he, he had shown it in his looks.
 
Enter Richard and Buckingham.
 
RICHARD
I pray you all, tell me what they deserve
That do conspire my death with devilish plots
Of damnèd witchcraft, and that have prevailed
Upon my body with their hellish charms?
HASTINGS
The tender love I bear your Grace, my lord,
Makes me most forward in this princely presence
To doom th’ offenders, whosoe’er they be.
I say, my lord, they have deservèd death.
RICHARD
Then be your eyes the witness of their evil.
He shows his arm.
Look how I am bewitched! Behold mine arm
Is like a blasted sapling withered up;
And this is Edward’s wife, that monstrous witch,
Consorted with that harlot, strumpet Shore,
That by their witchcraft thus have markèd me.
HASTINGS
If they have done this deed, my noble lord—
RICHARD
If? Thou protector of this damnèd strumpet,
Talk’st thou to me of “ifs”? Thou art a traitor.—
Off with his head. Now by Saint Paul I swear
I will not dine until I see the same.—
Lovell and Ratcliffe, look that it be done.—
The rest that love me, rise and follow me.
They exit. Lovell and Ratcliffe remain,
with the Lord Hastings.
HASTINGS
Woe, woe for England! Not a whit for me,
For I, too fond, might have prevented this.
Stanley did dream the boar did raze his helm,
And I did scorn it and disdain to fly.
Three times today my foot-cloth horse did stumble,
And started when he looked upon the Tower,
As loath to bear me to the slaughterhouse.
O, now I need the priest that spake to me!
I now repent I told the pursuivant,
As too triumphing, how mine enemies
Today at Pomfret bloodily were butchered,
And I myself secure in grace and favor.
O Margaret, Margaret, now thy heavy curse
Is lighted on poor Hastings’ wretched head.
RATCLIFFE
Come, come, dispatch. The Duke would be at
dinner.
Make a short shrift. He longs to see your head.
HASTINGS
O momentary grace of mortal men,
Which we more hunt for than the grace of God!
Who builds his hope in air of your good looks
Lives like a drunken sailor on a mast,
Ready with every nod to tumble down
Into the fatal bowels of the deep.
LOVELL
Come, come, dispatch. ’Tis bootless to exclaim.
HASTINGS
O bloody Richard! Miserable England,
I prophesy the fearfull’st time to thee
That ever wretched age hath looked upon.—
Come, lead me to the block. Bear him my head.
They smile at me who shortly shall be dead.
They exit.
 
Scene 5
Enter Richard and Buckingham, in rotten armor,
marvelous ill-favored.
 
RICHARD
Come, cousin, canst thou quake and change thy
color,
Murder thy breath in middle of a word,
And then again begin, and stop again,
As if thou were distraught and mad with terror?
BUCKINGHAM
Tut, I can counterfeit the deep tragedian,
Speak, and look back, and pry on every side,
Tremble and start at wagging of a straw,
Intending deep suspicion. Ghastly looks
Are at my service, like enforcèd smiles,
And both are ready, in their offices,
At any time to grace my stratagems.
But what, is Catesby gone?
RICHARD
He is; and see he brings the Mayor along.
 
Enter the Mayor and Catesby.
 
BUCKINGHAM  Lord Mayor—
RICHARD  Look to the drawbridge there!
BUCKINGHAM  Hark, a drum!
RICHARD  Catesby, o’erlook the walls.
Catesby exits.
BUCKINGHAM  Lord Mayor, the reason we have sent—
RICHARD
Look back! Defend thee! Here are enemies.
BUCKINGHAM
God and our innocence defend and guard us!
 
Enter Lovell and Ratcliffe, with Hastings’ head.
 
RICHARD
Be patient. They are friends, Ratcliffe and Lovell.
LOVELL
Here is the head of that ignoble traitor,
The dangerous and unsuspected Hastings.
RICHARD
So dear I loved the man that I must weep.
I took him for the plainest harmless creature
That breathed upon the Earth a Christian;
Made him my book, wherein my soul recorded
The history of all her secret thoughts.
So smooth he daubed his vice with show of virtue
That, his apparent open guilt omitted—
I mean his conversation with Shore’s wife—
He lived from all attainder of suspects.
BUCKINGHAM
Well, well, he was the covert’st sheltered traitor
That ever lived.—
Would you imagine, or almost believe,
Were ’t not that by great preservation
We live to tell it, that the subtle traitor
This day had plotted, in the council house,
To murder me and my good lord of Gloucester?
MAYOR  Had he done so?
RICHARD
What, think you we are Turks or infidels?
Or that we would, against the form of law,
Proceed thus rashly in the villain’s death,
But that the extreme peril of the case,
The peace of England, and our persons’ safety
Enforced us to this execution?
MAYOR
Now fair befall you! He deserved his death,
And your good Graces both have well proceeded
To warn false traitors from the like attempts.
BUCKINGHAM
I never looked for better at his hands
After he once fell in with Mistress Shore.
Yet had we not determined he should die
Until your Lordship came to see his end
(Which now the loving haste of these our friends,
Something against our meanings, have prevented),
Because, my lord, I would have had you heard
The traitor speak and timorously confess
The manner and the purpose of his treasons,
That you might well have signified the same
Unto the citizens, who haply may
Misconster us in him, and wail his death.
MAYOR
But, my good lord, your Graces’ words shall serve
As well as I had seen and heard him speak;
And do not doubt, right noble princes both,
But I’ll acquaint our duteous citizens
With all your just proceedings in this case.
RICHARD
And to that end we wished your Lordship here,
T’ avoid the censures of the carping world.
BUCKINGHAM
Which since you come too late of our intent,
Yet witness what you hear we did intend.
And so, my good Lord Mayor, we bid farewell.
Mayor exits.
RICHARD
Go after, after, cousin Buckingham.
The Mayor towards Guildhall hies him in all post.
There, at your meetest vantage of the time,
Infer the bastardy of Edward’s children.
Tell them how Edward put to death a citizen
Only for saying he would make his son
Heir to the Crown—meaning indeed his house,
Which, by the sign thereof, was termèd so.
Moreover, urge his hateful luxury
And bestial appetite in change of lust,
Which stretched unto their servants, daughters,
wives,
Even where his raging eye or savage heart,
Without control, lusted to make a prey.
Nay, for a need, thus far come near my person:
Tell them when that my mother went with child
Of that insatiate Edward, noble York
My princely father then had wars in France,
And, by true computation of the time,
Found that the issue was not his begot,
Which well appearèd in his lineaments,
Being nothing like the noble duke my father.
Yet touch this sparingly, as ’twere far off,
Because, my lord, you know my mother lives.
BUCKINGHAM
Doubt not, my lord. I’ll play the orator
As if the golden fee for which I plead
Were for myself. And so, my lord, adieu.
RICHARD
If you thrive well, bring them to Baynard’s Castle,
Where you shall find me well accompanied
With reverend fathers and well-learnèd bishops.
BUCKINGHAM
I go; and towards three or four o’clock
Look for the news that the Guildhall affords.
Buckingham exits.
RICHARD
Go, Lovell, with all speed to Doctor Shaa.
To Ratcliffe. Go thou to Friar Penker. Bid them
both
Meet me within this hour at Baynard’s Castle.
Ratcliffe and Lovell exit.
Now will I go to take some privy order
To draw the brats of Clarence out of sight,
And to give order that no manner person
Have any time recourse unto the Princes.
He exits.
 
Scene 6
Enter a Scrivener.
 
SCRIVENER
Here is the indictment of the good Lord Hastings,
Which in a set hand fairly is engrossed,
That it may be today read o’er in Paul’s.
And mark how well the sequel hangs together:
Eleven hours I have spent to write it over,
For yesternight by Catesby was it sent me;
The precedent was full as long a-doing,
And yet within these five hours Hastings lived,
Untainted, unexamined, free, at liberty.
Here’s a good world the while! Who is so gross
That cannot see this palpable device?
Yet who so bold but says he sees it not?
Bad is the world, and all will come to naught
When such ill dealing must be seen in thought.
He exits.
 
Scene 7
Enter Richard and Buckingham at several doors.
 
RICHARD
How now, how now? What say the citizens?
BUCKINGHAM
Now, by the holy mother of our Lord,
The citizens are mum, say not a word.
RICHARD
Touched you the bastardy of Edward’s children?
BUCKINGHAM
I did; with his contract with Lady Lucy
And his contract by deputy in France;
Th’ unsatiate greediness of his desire
And his enforcement of the city wives;
His tyranny for trifles; his own bastardy,
As being got, your father then in France,
And his resemblance being not like the Duke.
Withal, I did infer your lineaments,
Being the right idea of your father,
Both in your form and nobleness of mind;
Laid open all your victories in Scotland,
Your discipline in war, wisdom in peace,
Your bounty, virtue, fair humility;
Indeed, left nothing fitting for your purpose
Untouched or slightly handled in discourse.
And when mine oratory drew toward end,
I bid them that did love their country’s good
Cry “God save Richard, England’s royal king!”
RICHARD  And did they so?
BUCKINGHAM
No. So God help me, they spake not a word
But, like dumb statues or breathing stones,
Stared each on other and looked deadly pale;
Which when I saw, I reprehended them
And asked the Mayor what meant this willful silence.
His answer was, the people were not used
To be spoke to but by the Recorder.
Then he was urged to tell my tale again:
“Thus saith the Duke. Thus hath the Duke
inferred”—
But nothing spoke in warrant from himself.
When he had done, some followers of mine own,
At lower end of the hall, hurled up their caps,
And some ten voices cried “God save King Richard!”
And thus I took the vantage of those few.
“Thanks, gentle citizens and friends,” quoth I.
“This general applause and cheerful shout
Argues your wisdoms and your love to Richard”—
And even here brake off and came away.
RICHARD
What tongueless blocks were they! Would they not
speak?
Will not the Mayor then and his brethren come?
BUCKINGHAM
The Mayor is here at hand. Intend some fear;
Be not you spoke with but by mighty suit.
And look you get a prayer book in your hand
And stand between two churchmen, good my lord,
For on that ground I’ll make a holy descant.
And be not easily won to our requests.
Play the maid’s part: still answer “nay,” and take it.
RICHARD
I go. An if you plead as well for them
As I can say “nay” to thee for myself,
No doubt we bring it to a happy issue.
Knocking within.
BUCKINGHAM
Go, go, up to the leads. The Lord Mayor knocks.
Richard exits.
 
Enter the Mayor and Citizens.
 
Welcome, my lord. I dance attendance here.
I think the Duke will not be spoke withal.
 
Enter Catesby.
 
Now, Catesby, what says your lord to my request?
CATESBY
He doth entreat your Grace, my noble lord,
To visit him tomorrow or next day.
He is within, with two right reverend fathers,
Divinely bent to meditation,
And in no worldly suits would he be moved
To draw him from his holy exercise.
BUCKINGHAM
Return, good Catesby, to the gracious duke.
Tell him myself, the Mayor, and aldermen,
In deep designs, in matter of great moment
No less importing than our general good,
Are come to have some conference with his Grace.
CATESBY
I’ll signify so much unto him straight.                                	
He exits.
BUCKINGHAM
Ah ha, my lord, this prince is not an Edward!
He is not lolling on a lewd love-bed,
But on his knees at meditation;
Not dallying with a brace of courtesans,
But meditating with two deep divines;
Not sleeping, to engross his idle body,
But praying, to enrich his watchful soul.
Happy were England would this virtuous prince
Take on his Grace the sovereignty thereof.
But sure I fear we shall not win him to it.
MAYOR
Marry, God defend his Grace should say us nay.
BUCKINGHAM
I fear he will. Here Catesby comes again.
 
Enter Catesby.
 
Now, Catesby, what says his Grace?
CATESBY
He wonders to what end you have assembled
Such troops of citizens to come to him,
His Grace not being warned thereof before.
He fears, my lord, you mean no good to him.
BUCKINGHAM
Sorry I am my noble cousin should
Suspect me that I mean no good to him.
By heaven, we come to him in perfect love,
And so once more return and tell his Grace.
Catesby exits.
When holy and devout religious men
Are at their beads, ’tis much to draw them thence,
So sweet is zealous contemplation.
 
Enter Richard aloft, between two Bishops.
Catesby reenters.
 
MAYOR
See where his Grace stands, ’tween two clergymen.
BUCKINGHAM
Two props of virtue for a Christian prince,
To stay him from the fall of vanity;
And, see, a book of prayer in his hand,
True ornaments to know a holy man.—
Famous Plantagenet, most gracious prince,
Lend favorable ear to our requests,
And pardon us the interruption
Of thy devotion and right Christian zeal.
RICHARD
My lord, there needs no such apology.
I do beseech your Grace to pardon me,
Who, earnest in the service of my God,
Deferred the visitation of my friends.
But, leaving this, what is your Grace’s pleasure?
BUCKINGHAM
Even that, I hope, which pleaseth God above
And all good men of this ungoverned isle.
RICHARD
I do suspect I have done some offense
That seems disgracious in the city’s eye,
And that you come to reprehend my ignorance.
BUCKINGHAM
You have, my lord. Would it might please your
Grace,
On our entreaties, to amend your fault.
RICHARD
Else wherefore breathe I in a Christian land?
BUCKINGHAM
Know, then, it is your fault that you resign
The supreme seat, the throne majestical,
The sceptered office of your ancestors,
Your state of fortune, and your due of birth,
The lineal glory of your royal house,
To the corruption of a blemished stock,
Whiles in the mildness of your sleepy thoughts,
Which here we waken to our country’s good,
The noble isle doth want her proper limbs—
Her face defaced with scars of infamy,
Her royal stock graft with ignoble plants,
And almost shouldered in the swallowing gulf
Of dark forgetfulness and deep oblivion;
Which to recure, we heartily solicit
Your gracious self to take on you the charge
And kingly government of this your land,
Not as Protector, steward, substitute,
Or lowly factor for another’s gain,
But as successively, from blood to blood,
Your right of birth, your empery, your own.
For this, consorted with the citizens,
Your very worshipful and loving friends,
And by their vehement instigation,
In this just cause come I to move your Grace.
RICHARD
I cannot tell if to depart in silence
Or bitterly to speak in your reproof
Best fitteth my degree or your condition.
If not to answer, you might haply think
Tongue-tied ambition, not replying, yielded
To bear the golden yoke of sovereignty,
Which fondly you would here impose on me.
If to reprove you for this suit of yours,
So seasoned with your faithful love to me,
Then on the other side I checked my friends.
Therefore, to speak, and to avoid the first,
And then, in speaking, not to incur the last,
Definitively thus I answer you:
Your love deserves my thanks, but my desert
Unmeritable shuns your high request.
First, if all obstacles were cut away
And that my path were even to the crown
As the ripe revenue and due of birth,
Yet so much is my poverty of spirit,
So mighty and so many my defects,
That I would rather hide me from my greatness,
Being a bark to brook no mighty sea,
Than in my greatness covet to be hid
And in the vapor of my glory smothered.
But, God be thanked, there is no need of me,
And much I need to help you, were there need.
The royal tree hath left us royal fruit,
Which, mellowed by the stealing hours of time,
Will well become the seat of majesty,
And make, no doubt, us happy by his reign.
On him I lay that you would lay on me,
The right and fortune of his happy stars,
Which God defend that I should wring from him.
BUCKINGHAM
My lord, this argues conscience in your Grace,
But the respects thereof are nice and trivial,
All circumstances well considerèd.
You say that Edward is your brother’s son;
So say we too, but not by Edward’s wife.
For first was he contract to Lady Lucy—
Your mother lives a witness to his vow—
And afterward by substitute betrothed
To Bona, sister to the King of France.
These both put off, a poor petitioner,
A care-crazed mother to a many sons,
A beauty-waning and distressèd widow,
Even in the afternoon of her best days,
Made prize and purchase of his wanton eye,
Seduced the pitch and height of his degree
To base declension and loathed bigamy.
By her in his unlawful bed he got
This Edward, whom our manners call “the Prince.”
More bitterly could I expostulate,
Save that, for reverence to some alive,
I give a sparing limit to my tongue.
Then, good my lord, take to your royal self
This proffered benefit of dignity,
If not to bless us and the land withal,
Yet to draw forth your noble ancestry
From the corruption of abusing times
Unto a lineal, true-derivèd course.
MAYOR
Do, good my lord. Your citizens entreat you.
BUCKINGHAM
Refuse not, mighty lord, this proffered love.
CATESBY
O, make them joyful. Grant their lawful suit.
RICHARD
Alas, why would you heap this care on me?
I am unfit for state and majesty.
I do beseech you, take it not amiss;
I cannot, nor I will not, yield to you.
BUCKINGHAM
If you refuse it, as in love and zeal
Loath to depose the child, your brother’s son—
As well we know your tenderness of heart
And gentle, kind, effeminate remorse,
Which we have noted in you to your kindred
And equally indeed to all estates—
Yet know, whe’er you accept our suit or no,
Your brother’s son shall never reign our king,
But we will plant some other in the throne,
To the disgrace and downfall of your house.
And in this resolution here we leave you.—
Come, citizens. Zounds, I’ll entreat no more.
RICHARD
O, do not swear, my lord of Buckingham!
Buckingham and some others exit.
CATESBY
Call him again, sweet prince. Accept their suit.
If you deny them, all the land will rue it.
RICHARD
Will you enforce me to a world of cares?
Call them again. I am not made of stones,
But penetrable to your kind entreaties,
Albeit against my conscience and my soul.
 
Enter Buckingham and the rest.
 
Cousin of Buckingham and sage, grave men,
Since you will buckle Fortune on my back,
To bear her burden, whe’er I will or no,
I must have patience to endure the load;
But if black scandal or foul-faced reproach
Attend the sequel of your imposition,
Your mere enforcement shall acquittance me
From all the impure blots and stains thereof,
For God doth know, and you may partly see,
How far I am from the desire of this.
MAYOR
God bless your Grace! We see it and will say it.
RICHARD
In saying so, you shall but say the truth.
BUCKINGHAM
Then I salute you with this royal title:
Long live Richard, England’s worthy king!
ALL  Amen.
BUCKINGHAM
Tomorrow may it please you to be crowned?
RICHARD
Even when you please, for you will have it so.
BUCKINGHAM
Tomorrow, then, we will attend your Grace,
And so most joyfully we take our leave.
RICHARD, to the Bishops
Come, let us to our holy work again.—
Farewell, my cousin. Farewell, gentle friends.
They exit.
 
 
 

 
 
ACT 4
 
Scene 1
Enter Queen Elizabeth, with the Duchess of York, and
the Lord Marquess of Dorset, at one door; Anne,
Duchess of Gloucester with Clarence’s daughter, at
another door.
 
DUCHESS
Who meets us here? My niece Plantagenet
Led in the hand of her kind aunt of Gloucester?
Now, for my life, she’s wandering to the Tower,
On pure heart’s love, to greet the tender prince.—
Daughter, well met.
ANNE  God give your Graces both
A happy and a joyful time of day.
QUEEN ELIZABETH
As much to you, good sister. Whither away?
ANNE
No farther than the Tower, and, as I guess,
Upon the like devotion as yourselves,
To gratulate the gentle princes there.
QUEEN ELIZABETH
Kind sister, thanks. We’ll enter all together.
 
Enter Brakenbury, the Lieutenant.
 
And in good time here the Lieutenant comes.—
Master Lieutenant, pray you, by your leave,
How doth the Prince and my young son of York?
BRAKENBURY
Right well, dear madam. By your patience,
I may not suffer you to visit them.
The King hath strictly charged the contrary.
QUEEN ELIZABETH
The King? Who’s that?
BRAKENBURY  I mean, the Lord Protector.
QUEEN ELIZABETH
The Lord protect him from that kingly title!
Hath he set bounds between their love and me?
I am their mother. Who shall bar me from them?
DUCHESS
I am their father’s mother. I will see them.
ANNE
Their aunt I am in law, in love their mother.
Then bring me to their sights. I’ll bear thy blame
And take thy office from thee, on my peril.
BRAKENBURY
No, madam, no. I may not leave it so.
I am bound by oath, and therefore pardon me.
Brakenbury the Lieutenant exits.
 
Enter Stanley.
 
STANLEY
Let me but meet you ladies one hour hence,
And I’ll salute your Grace of York as mother
And reverend looker-on of two fair queens.
To Anne. Come, madam, you must straight to
Westminster,
There to be crownèd Richard’s royal queen.
QUEEN ELIZABETH  Ah, cut my lace asunder
That my pent heart may have some scope to beat,
Or else I swoon with this dead-killing news!
ANNE
Despiteful tidings! O, unpleasing news!
DORSET, to Queen Elizabeth
Be of good cheer, mother. How fares your Grace?
QUEEN ELIZABETH
O Dorset, speak not to me. Get thee gone.
Death and destruction dogs thee at thy heels.
Thy mother’s name is ominous to children.
If thou wilt outstrip death, go, cross the seas,
And live with Richmond, from the reach of hell.
Go, hie thee, hie thee from this slaughterhouse,
Lest thou increase the number of the dead
And make me die the thrall of Margaret’s curse,
Nor mother, wife, nor England’s counted queen.
STANLEY
Full of wise care is this your counsel, madam.
To Dorset. Take all the swift advantage of the
hours.
You shall have letters from me to my son
In your behalf, to meet you on the way.
Be not ta’en tardy by unwise delay.
DUCHESS
O ill-dispersing wind of misery!
O my accursèd womb, the bed of death!
A cockatrice hast thou hatched to the world,
Whose unavoided eye is murderous.
STANLEY, to Anne
Come, madam, come. I in all haste was sent.
ANNE
And I with all unwillingness will go.
O, would to God that the inclusive verge
Of golden metal that must round my brow
Were red-hot steel to sear me to the brains!
Anointed let me be with deadly venom,
And die ere men can say “God save the Queen.”
QUEEN ELIZABETH
Go, go, poor soul, I envy not thy glory.
To feed my humor, wish thyself no harm.
ANNE
No? Why? When he that is my husband now
Came to me as I followed Henry’s corse,
When scarce the blood was well washed from his
hands
Which issued from my other angel husband
And that dear saint which then I weeping followed—
O, when, I say, I looked on Richard’s face,
This was my wish: be thou, quoth I, accursed
For making me, so young, so old a widow;
And, when thou wedd’st, let sorrow haunt thy bed;
And be thy wife, if any be so mad,
More miserable by the life of thee
Than thou hast made me by my dear lord’s death.
Lo, ere I can repeat this curse again,
Within so small a time my woman’s heart
Grossly grew captive to his honey words
And proved the subject of mine own soul’s curse,
Which hitherto hath held my eyes from rest,
For never yet one hour in his bed
Did I enjoy the golden dew of sleep,
But with his timorous dreams was still awaked.
Besides, he hates me for my father Warwick,
And will, no doubt, shortly be rid of me.
QUEEN ELIZABETH
Poor heart, adieu. I pity thy complaining.
ANNE
No more than with my soul I mourn for yours.
DORSET
Farewell, thou woeful welcomer of glory.
ANNE
Adieu, poor soul that tak’st thy leave of it.
DUCHESS, to Dorset
Go thou to Richmond, and good fortune guide thee.
To Anne. Go thou to Richard, and good angels
tend thee.
To Queen Elizabeth. Go thou to sanctuary, and
good thoughts possess thee.
I to my grave, where peace and rest lie with me.
Eighty-odd years of sorrow have I seen,
And each hour’s joy wracked with a week of teen.
QUEEN ELIZABETH
Stay, yet look back with me unto the Tower.—
Pity, you ancient stones, those tender babes
Whom envy hath immured within your walls—
Rough cradle for such little pretty ones.
Rude ragged nurse, old sullen playfellow
For tender princes, use my babies well.
So foolish sorrows bids your stones farewell.
They exit.
 
Scene 2
Sound a sennet. Enter Richard in pomp; Buckingham,
Catesby, Ratcliffe, Lovell, and others, including a Page.
 
RICHARD
Stand all apart.—Cousin of Buckingham.
The others move aside.
BUCKINGHAM  My gracious sovereign.
RICHARD
Give me thy hand.
Here he ascendeth the throne. Sound trumpets.
Thus high, by thy advice
And thy assistance is King Richard seated.
But shall we wear these glories for a day,
Or shall they last and we rejoice in them?
BUCKINGHAM
Still live they, and forever let them last.
RICHARD
Ah, Buckingham, now do I play the touch,
To try if thou be current gold indeed:
Young Edward lives; think now what I would speak.
BUCKINGHAM  Say on, my loving lord.
RICHARD
Why, Buckingham, I say I would be king.
BUCKINGHAM
Why so you are, my thrice-renownèd lord.
RICHARD
Ha! Am I king? ’Tis so—but Edward lives.
BUCKINGHAM
True, noble prince.
RICHARD  O bitter consequence
That Edward still should live “true noble prince”!
Cousin, thou wast not wont to be so dull.
Shall I be plain? I wish the bastards dead,
And I would have it suddenly performed.
What sayst thou now? Speak suddenly. Be brief.
BUCKINGHAM  Your Grace may do your pleasure.
RICHARD
Tut, tut, thou art all ice; thy kindness freezes.
Say, have I thy consent that they shall die?
BUCKINGHAM
Give me some little breath, some pause, dear lord,
Before I positively speak in this.
I will resolve you herein presently.
Buckingham exits.
CATESBY, aside to the other Attendants
The King is angry. See, he gnaws his lip.
RICHARD, aside
I will converse with iron-witted fools
And unrespective boys. None are for me
That look into me with considerate eyes.
High-reaching Buckingham grows circumspect.—
Boy!
PAGE, coming forward  My lord?
RICHARD
Know’st thou not any whom corrupting gold
Will tempt unto a close exploit of death?
PAGE
I know a discontented gentleman
Whose humble means match not his haughty spirit.
Gold were as good as twenty orators,
And will, no doubt, tempt him to anything.
RICHARD
What is his name?
PAGE  His name, my lord, is Tyrrel.
RICHARD
I partly know the man. Go, call him hither, boy.
Page exits.
Aside. The deep-revolving witty Buckingham
No more shall be the neighbor to my counsels.
Hath he so long held out with me, untired,
And stops he now for breath? Well, be it so.
 
Enter Stanley.
 
How now, Lord Stanley, what’s the news?
STANLEY  Know, my loving lord,
The Marquess Dorset, as I hear, is fled
To Richmond, in the parts where he abides.
He walks aside.
RICHARD
Come hither, Catesby. Rumor it abroad
That Anne my wife is very grievous sick.
I will take order for her keeping close.
Inquire me out some mean poor gentleman,
Whom I will marry straight to Clarence’ daughter.
The boy is foolish, and I fear not him.
Look how thou dream’st! I say again, give out
That Anne my queen is sick and like to die.
About it, for it stands me much upon
To stop all hopes whose growth may damage me.
Catesby exits.
Aside. I must be married to my brother’s daughter,
Or else my kingdom stands on brittle glass.
Murder her brothers, and then marry her—
Uncertain way of gain. But I am in
So far in blood that sin will pluck on sin.
Tear-falling pity dwells not in this eye.
 
Enter Tyrrel.
 
Is thy name Tyrrel?
TYRREL
James Tyrrel, and your most obedient subject.
RICHARD
Art thou indeed?
TYRREL  Prove me, my gracious lord.
RICHARD
Dar’st thou resolve to kill a friend of mine?
TYRREL
Please you. But I had rather kill two enemies.
RICHARD
Why then, thou hast it. Two deep enemies,
Foes to my rest, and my sweet sleep’s disturbers,
Are they that I would have thee deal upon.
Tyrrel, I mean those bastards in the Tower.
TYRREL
Let me have open means to come to them,
And soon I’ll rid you from the fear of them.
RICHARD
Thou sing’st sweet music. Hark, come hither, Tyrrel.
Tyrrel approaches Richard and kneels.
Go, by this token. Rise, and lend thine ear.
Tyrrel rises, and Richard whispers
to him. Then Tyrrel steps back.
There is no more but so. Say it is done,
And I will love thee and prefer thee for it.
TYRREL  I will dispatch it straight.                                       	
He exits.
 
Enter Buckingham.
 
BUCKINGHAM
My lord, I have considered in my mind
The late request that you did sound me in.
RICHARD
Well, let that rest. Dorset is fled to Richmond.
BUCKINGHAM  I hear the news, my lord.
RICHARD
Stanley, he is your wife’s son. Well, look unto it.
BUCKINGHAM
My lord, I claim the gift, my due by promise,
For which your honor and your faith is pawned—
Th’ earldom of Hereford and the movables
Which you have promisèd I shall possess.
RICHARD
Stanley, look to your wife. If she convey
Letters to Richmond, you shall answer it.
BUCKINGHAM
What says your Highness to my just request?
RICHARD
I do remember me, Henry the Sixth
Did prophesy that Richmond should be king,
When Richmond was a little peevish boy.
A king perhaps—
BUCKINGHAM  My lord—
RICHARD
How chance the prophet could not at that time
Have told me, I being by, that I should kill him?
BUCKINGHAM
My lord, your promise for the earldom—
RICHARD
Richmond! When last I was at Exeter,
The Mayor in courtesy showed me the castle
And called it Rougemont, at which name I started,
Because a bard of Ireland told me once
I should not live long after I saw Richmond.
BUCKINGHAM  My lord—
RICHARD  Ay, what’s o’clock?
BUCKINGHAM
I am thus bold to put your Grace in mind
Of what you promised me.
RICHARD  Well, but what’s o’clock?
BUCKINGHAM  Upon the stroke of ten.
RICHARD  Well, let it strike.
BUCKINGHAM  Why let it strike?
RICHARD
Because that, like a jack, thou keep’st the stroke
Betwixt thy begging and my meditation.
I am not in the giving vein today.
BUCKINGHAM
Why then, resolve me whether you will or no.
RICHARD
Thou troublest me; I am not in the vein.
He exits, and is followed by all but Buckingham.
BUCKINGHAM
And is it thus? Repays he my deep service
With such contempt? Made I him king for this?
O, let me think on Hastings and be gone
To Brecknock, while my fearful head is on!
He exits.
 
Scene 3
Enter Tyrrel.
 
TYRREL
The tyrannous and bloody act is done,
The most arch deed of piteous massacre
That ever yet this land was guilty of.
Dighton and Forrest, who I did suborn
To do this piece of ruthless butchery,
Albeit they were fleshed villains, bloody dogs,
Melted with tenderness and mild compassion,
Wept like two children in their deaths’ sad story.
“O thus,” quoth Dighton, “lay the gentle babes.”
“Thus, thus,” quoth Forrest, “girdling one another
Within their alabaster innocent arms.
Their lips were four red roses on a stalk,
And in their summer beauty kissed each other.
A book of prayers on their pillow lay,
Which once,” quoth Forrest, “almost changed my
mind,
But, O, the devil—” There the villain stopped;
When Dighton thus told on: “We smotherèd
The most replenishèd sweet work of nature
That from the prime creation e’er she framed.”
Hence both are gone with conscience and remorse;
They could not speak; and so I left them both
To bear this tidings to the bloody king.
 
Enter Richard.
 
And here he comes.—All health, my sovereign lord.
RICHARD
Kind Tyrrel, am I happy in thy news?
TYRREL
If to have done the thing you gave in charge
Beget your happiness, be happy then,
For it is done.
RICHARD  But did’st thou see them dead?
TYRREL
I did, my lord.
RICHARD  And buried, gentle Tyrrel?
TYRREL
The chaplain of the Tower hath buried them,
But where, to say the truth, I do not know.
RICHARD
Come to me, Tyrrel, soon at after-supper,
When thou shalt tell the process of their death.
Meantime, but think how I may do thee good,
And be inheritor of thy desire.
Farewell till then.
TYRREL  I humbly take my leave.
Tyrrel exits.
RICHARD
The son of Clarence have I pent up close,
His daughter meanly have I matched in marriage,
The sons of Edward sleep in Abraham’s bosom,
And Anne my wife hath bid this world goodnight.
Now, for I know the Breton Richmond aims
At young Elizabeth, my brother’s daughter,
And by that knot looks proudly on the crown,
To her go I, a jolly thriving wooer.
 
Enter Ratcliffe.
 
RATCLIFFE  My lord.
RICHARD
Good or bad news, that thou com’st in so bluntly?
RATCLIFFE
Bad news, my lord. Morton is fled to Richmond,
And Buckingham, backed with the hardy Welshmen,
Is in the field, and still his power increaseth.
RICHARD
Ely with Richmond troubles me more near
Than Buckingham and his rash-levied strength.
Come, I have learned that fearful commenting
Is leaden servitor to dull delay;
Delay leads impotent and snail-paced beggary;
Then fiery expedition be my wing,
Jove’s Mercury, and herald for a king.
Go, muster men. My counsel is my shield.
We must be brief when traitors brave the field.
They exit.
 
Scene 4
Enter old Queen Margaret.
 
QUEEN MARGARET
So now prosperity begins to mellow
And drop into the rotten mouth of death.
Here in these confines slyly have I lurked
To watch the waning of mine enemies.
A dire induction am I witness to,
And will to France, hoping the consequence
Will prove as bitter, black, and tragical.
Withdraw thee, wretched Margaret. Who comes
here?                                                                        	
She steps aside.
 
Enter Duchess of York and Queen Elizabeth.
 
QUEEN ELIZABETH
Ah, my poor princes! Ah, my tender babes,
My unblown flowers, new-appearing sweets,
If yet your gentle souls fly in the air
And be not fixed in doom perpetual,
Hover about me with your airy wings
And hear your mother’s lamentation.
QUEEN MARGARET, aside
Hover about her; say that right for right
Hath dimmed your infant morn to agèd night.
DUCHESS
So many miseries have crazed my voice
That my woe-wearied tongue is still and mute.
Edward Plantagenet, why art thou dead?
QUEEN MARGARET, aside
Plantagenet doth quit Plantagenet;
Edward for Edward pays a dying debt.
QUEEN ELIZABETH
Wilt thou, O God, fly from such gentle lambs
And throw them in the entrails of the wolf?
When didst thou sleep when such a deed was done?
QUEEN MARGARET, aside
When holy Harry died, and my sweet son.
DUCHESS, to Queen Elizabeth
Dead life, blind sight, poor mortal living ghost,
Woe’s scene, world’s shame, grave’s due by life
usurped,
Brief abstract and record of tedious days,
Rest thy unrest on England’s lawful earth,
Unlawfully made drunk with innocent blood.
QUEEN ELIZABETH, as they both sit down
Ah, that thou wouldst as soon afford a grave
As thou canst yield a melancholy seat,
Then would I hide my bones, not rest them here.
Ah, who hath any cause to mourn but we?
QUEEN MARGARET, coming forward
If ancient sorrow be most reverend,
Give mine the benefit of seigniory,
And let my griefs frown on the upper hand.
If sorrow can admit society,
Tell over your woes again by viewing mine.
I had an Edward till a Richard killed him;
I had a husband till a Richard killed him.
Thou hadst an Edward till a Richard killed him;
Thou hadst a Richard till a Richard killed him.
DUCHESS
I had a Richard too, and thou did’st kill him;
I had a Rutland too; thou holp’st to kill him.
QUEEN MARGARET
Thou hadst a Clarence too, and Richard killed him.
From forth the kennel of thy womb hath crept
A hellhound that doth hunt us all to death—
That dog, that had his teeth before his eyes,
To worry lambs and lap their gentle blood;
That excellent grand tyrant of the Earth,
That reigns in gallèd eyes of weeping souls;
That foul defacer of God’s handiwork
Thy womb let loose to chase us to our graves.
O upright, just, and true-disposing God,
How do I thank thee that this carnal cur
Preys on the issue of his mother’s body
And makes her pew-fellow with others’ moan!
DUCHESS, standing
O Harry’s wife, triumph not in my woes!
God witness with me, I have wept for thine.
QUEEN MARGARET
Bear with me. I am hungry for revenge,
And now I cloy me with beholding it.
Thy Edward he is dead, that killed my Edward,
Thy other Edward dead, to quit my Edward;
Young York, he is but boot, because both they
Matched not the high perfection of my loss.
Thy Clarence he is dead that stabbed my Edward,
And the beholders of this frantic play,
Th’ adulterate Hastings, Rivers, Vaughan, Grey,
Untimely smothered in their dusky graves.
Richard yet lives, hell’s black intelligencer,
Only reserved their factor to buy souls
And send them thither. But at hand, at hand
Ensues his piteous and unpitied end.
Earth gapes, hell burns, fiends roar, saints pray,
To have him suddenly conveyed from hence.
Cancel his bond of life, dear God I pray,
That I may live and say “The dog is dead.”
QUEEN ELIZABETH, standing
O, thou didst prophesy the time would come
That I should wish for thee to help me curse
That bottled spider, that foul bunch-backed toad!
QUEEN MARGARET
I called thee then “vain flourish of my fortune.”
I called thee then poor shadow, “painted queen,”
The presentation of but what I was,
The flattering index of a direful pageant,
One heaved a-high to be hurled down below,
A mother only mocked with two fair babes,
A dream of what thou wast, a garish flag
To be the aim of every dangerous shot,
A sign of dignity, a breath, a bubble,
A queen in jest, only to fill the scene.
Where is thy husband now? Where be thy brothers?
Where are thy two sons? Wherein dost thou joy?
Who sues and kneels and says “God save the
Queen?”
Where be the bending peers that flattered thee?
Where be the thronging troops that followed thee?
Decline all this, and see what now thou art:
For happy wife, a most distressèd widow;
For joyful mother, one that wails the name;
For one being sued to, one that humbly sues;
For queen, a very caitiff crowned with care;
For she that scorned at me, now scorned of me;
For she being feared of all, now fearing one;
For she commanding all, obeyed of none.
Thus hath the course of justice whirled about
And left thee but a very prey to time,
Having no more but thought of what thou wast
To torture thee the more, being what thou art.
Thou didst usurp my place, and dost thou not
Usurp the just proportion of my sorrow?
Now thy proud neck bears half my burdened yoke,
From which even here I slip my weary head
And leave the burden of it all on thee.
Farewell, York’s wife, and queen of sad mischance.
These English woes shall make me smile in France.
She begins to exit.
QUEEN ELIZABETH
O, thou well-skilled in curses, stay awhile,
And teach me how to curse mine enemies.
QUEEN MARGARET
Forbear to sleep the nights, and fast the days;
Compare dead happiness with living woe;
Think that thy babes were sweeter than they were,
And he that slew them fouler than he is.
Bettering thy loss makes the bad causer worse.
Revolving this will teach thee how to curse.
QUEEN ELIZABETH
My words are dull. O, quicken them with thine!
QUEEN MARGARET
Thy woes will make them sharp and pierce like
mine.                                                                        	
Margaret exits.
DUCHESS
Why should calamity be full of words?
QUEEN ELIZABETH
Windy attorneys to their clients’ woes,
Airy succeeders of intestate joys,
Poor breathing orators of miseries,
Let them have scope; though what they will impart
Help nothing else, yet do they ease the heart.
DUCHESS
If so, then be not tongue-tied. Go with me,
And in the breath of bitter words let’s smother
My damnèd son that thy two sweet sons smothered.
A trumpet sounds.
The trumpet sounds. Be copious in exclaims.
 
                     	Enter King Richard and his train, including Catesby.
 
RICHARD
Who intercepts me in my expedition?
DUCHESS
O, she that might have intercepted thee,
By strangling thee in her accursèd womb,
From all the slaughters, wretch, that thou hast done.
QUEEN ELIZABETH, to Richard
Hid’st thou that forehead with a golden crown
Where should be branded, if that right were right,
The slaughter of the prince that owed that crown
And the dire death of my poor sons and brothers?
Tell me, thou villain-slave, where are my children?
DUCHESS, to Richard
Thou toad, thou toad, where is thy brother Clarence,
And little Ned Plantagenet his son?
QUEEN ELIZABETH, to Richard
Where is the gentle Rivers, Vaughan, Grey?
DUCHESS, to Richard  Where is kind Hastings?
RICHARD
A flourish, trumpets! Strike alarum, drums!
Let not the heavens hear these telltale women
Rail on the Lord’s anointed. Strike, I say!
Flourish. Alarums.
Either be patient and entreat me fair,
Or with the clamorous report of war
Thus will I drown your exclamations.
DUCHESS  Art thou my son?
RICHARD
Ay, I thank God, my father, and yourself.
DUCHESS
Then patiently hear my impatience.
RICHARD
Madam, I have a touch of your condition,
That cannot brook the accent of reproof.
DUCHESS
O, let me speak!
RICHARD  Do then, but I’ll not hear.
DUCHESS
I will be mild and gentle in my words.
RICHARD
And brief, good mother, for I am in haste.
DUCHESS
Art thou so hasty? I have stayed for thee,
God knows, in torment and in agony.
RICHARD
And came I not at last to comfort you?
DUCHESS
No, by the Holy Rood, thou know’st it well.
Thou cam’st on Earth to make the Earth my hell.
A grievous burden was thy birth to me;
Tetchy and wayward was thy infancy;
Thy school days frightful, desp’rate, wild, and
furious;
Thy prime of manhood daring, bold, and venturous;
Thy age confirmed, proud, subtle, sly, and bloody,
More mild, but yet more harmful, kind in hatred.
What comfortable hour canst thou name,
That ever graced me with thy company?
RICHARD
Faith, none but Humfrey Hower, that called your
Grace
To breakfast once, forth of my company.
If I be so disgracious in your eye,
Let me march on and not offend you, madam.—
Strike up the drum.
DUCHESS  I prithee, hear me speak.
RICHARD
You speak too bitterly.
DUCHESS  Hear me a word,
For I shall never speak to thee again.
RICHARD  So.
DUCHESS
Either thou wilt die by God’s just ordinance
Ere from this war thou turn a conqueror,
Or I with grief and extreme age shall perish
And nevermore behold thy face again.
Therefore take with thee my most grievous curse,
Which in the day of battle tire thee more
Than all the complete armor that thou wear’st.
My prayers on the adverse party fight,
And there the little souls of Edward’s children
Whisper the spirits of thine enemies
And promise them success and victory.
Bloody thou art; bloody will be thy end.
Shame serves thy life and doth thy death attend.
She exits.
QUEEN ELIZABETH
Though far more cause, yet much less spirit to
curse
Abides in me. I say amen to her.
RICHARD
Stay, madam. I must talk a word with you.
QUEEN ELIZABETH
I have no more sons of the royal blood
For thee to slaughter. For my daughters, Richard,
They shall be praying nuns, not weeping queens,
And therefore level not to hit their lives.
RICHARD
You have a daughter called Elizabeth,
Virtuous and fair, royal and gracious.
QUEEN ELIZABETH
And must she die for this? O, let her live,
And I’ll corrupt her manners, stain her beauty,
Slander myself as false to Edward’s bed,
Throw over her the veil of infamy.
So she may live unscarred of bleeding slaughter,
I will confess she was not Edward’s daughter.
RICHARD
Wrong not her birth. She is a royal princess.
QUEEN ELIZABETH
To save her life, I’ll say she is not so.
RICHARD
Her life is safest only in her birth.
QUEEN ELIZABETH
And only in that safety died her brothers.
RICHARD
Lo, at their birth good stars were opposite.
QUEEN ELIZABETH
No, to their lives ill friends were contrary.
RICHARD
All unavoided is the doom of destiny.
QUEEN ELIZABETH
True, when avoided grace makes destiny.
My babes were destined to a fairer death
If grace had blessed thee with a fairer life.
RICHARD
You speak as if that I had slain my cousins.
QUEEN ELIZABETH
Cousins, indeed, and by their uncle cozened
Of comfort, kingdom, kindred, freedom, life.
Whose hand soever launched their tender hearts,
Thy head, all indirectly, gave direction.
No doubt the murd’rous knife was dull and blunt
Till it was whetted on thy stone-hard heart,
To revel in the entrails of my lambs.
But that still use of grief makes wild grief tame,
My tongue should to thy ears not name my boys
Till that my nails were anchored in thine eyes,
And I, in such a desp’rate bay of death,
Like a poor bark of sails and tackling reft,
Rush all to pieces on thy rocky bosom.
RICHARD
Madam, so thrive I in my enterprise
And dangerous success of bloody wars
As I intend more good to you and yours
Than ever you or yours by me were harmed!
QUEEN ELIZABETH
What good is covered with the face of heaven,
To be discovered, that can do me good?
RICHARD
Th’ advancement of your children, gentle lady.
QUEEN ELIZABETH
Up to some scaffold, there to lose their heads.
RICHARD
Unto the dignity and height of fortune,
The high imperial type of this Earth’s glory.
QUEEN ELIZABETH
Flatter my sorrow with report of it.
Tell me what state, what dignity, what honor,
Canst thou demise to any child of mine?
RICHARD
Even all I have—ay, and myself and all—
Will I withal endow a child of thine;
So in the Lethe of thy angry soul
Thou drown the sad remembrance of those wrongs
Which thou supposest I have done to thee.
QUEEN ELIZABETH
Be brief, lest that the process of thy kindness
Last longer telling than thy kindness’ date.
RICHARD
Then know that from my soul I love thy daughter.
QUEEN ELIZABETH
My daughter’s mother thinks it with her soul.
RICHARD  What do you think?
QUEEN ELIZABETH
That thou dost love my daughter from thy soul.
So from thy soul’s love didst thou love her brothers,
And from my heart’s love I do thank thee for it.
RICHARD
Be not so hasty to confound my meaning.
I mean that with my soul I love thy daughter
And do intend to make her Queen of England.
QUEEN ELIZABETH
Well then, who dost thou mean shall be her king?
RICHARD
Even he that makes her queen. Who else should be?
QUEEN ELIZABETH
What, thou?
RICHARD  Even so. How think you of it?
QUEEN ELIZABETH
How canst thou woo her?
RICHARD  That would I learn of you,
As one being best acquainted with her humor.
QUEEN ELIZABETH  And wilt thou learn of me?
RICHARD  Madam, with all my heart.
QUEEN ELIZABETH
Send to her, by the man that slew her brothers,
A pair of bleeding hearts; thereon engrave
“Edward” and “York.” Then haply will she weep.
Therefore present to her—as sometime Margaret
Did to thy father, steeped in Rutland’s blood—
A handkerchief, which say to her did drain
The purple sap from her sweet brother’s body,
And bid her wipe her weeping eyes withal.
If this inducement move her not to love,
Send her a letter of thy noble deeds;
Tell her thou mad’st away her uncle Clarence,
Her uncle Rivers, ay, and for her sake
Mad’st quick conveyance with her good aunt Anne.
RICHARD
You mock me, madam. This is not the way
To win your daughter.
QUEEN ELIZABETH  There is no other way,
Unless thou couldst put on some other shape
And not be Richard, that hath done all this.
RICHARD
Say that I did all this for love of her.
QUEEN ELIZABETH
Nay, then indeed she cannot choose but hate thee,
Having bought love with such a bloody spoil.
RICHARD
Look what is done cannot be now amended.
Men shall deal unadvisedly sometimes,
Which after-hours gives leisure to repent.
If I did take the kingdom from your sons,
To make amends I’ll give it to your daughter.
If I have killed the issue of your womb,
To quicken your increase I will beget
Mine issue of your blood upon your daughter.
A grandam’s name is little less in love
Than is the doting title of a mother.
They are as children but one step below,
Even of your metal, of your very blood,
Of all one pain, save for a night of groans
Endured of her for whom you bid like sorrow.
Your children were vexation to your youth,
But mine shall be a comfort to your age.
The loss you have is but a son being king,
And by that loss your daughter is made queen.
I cannot make you what amends I would;
Therefore accept such kindness as I can.
Dorset your son, that with a fearful soul
Leads discontented steps in foreign soil,
This fair alliance quickly shall call home
To high promotions and great dignity.
The king that calls your beauteous daughter wife
Familiarly shall call thy Dorset brother.
Again shall you be mother to a king,
And all the ruins of distressful times
Repaired with double riches of content.
What, we have many goodly days to see!
The liquid drops of tears that you have shed
Shall come again, transformed to orient pearl,
Advantaging their love with interest
Of ten times double gain of happiness.
Go then, my mother; to thy daughter go.
Make bold her bashful years with your experience;
Prepare her ears to hear a wooer’s tale;
Put in her tender heart th’ aspiring flame
Of golden sovereignty; acquaint the Princess
With the sweet silent hours of marriage joys;
And when this arm of mine hath chastisèd
The petty rebel, dull-brained Buckingham,
Bound with triumphant garlands will I come
And lead thy daughter to a conqueror’s bed,
To whom I will retail my conquest won,
And she shall be sole victoress, Caesar’s Caesar.
QUEEN ELIZABETH
What were I best to say? Her father’s brother
Would be her lord? Or shall I say her uncle?
Or he that slew her brothers and her uncles?
Under what title shall I woo for thee,
That God, the law, my honor, and her love
Can make seem pleasing to her tender years?
RICHARD
Infer fair England’s peace by this alliance.
QUEEN ELIZABETH
Which she shall purchase with still-lasting war.
RICHARD
Tell her the King, that may command, entreats—
QUEEN ELIZABETH
That, at her hands, which the King’s King forbids.
RICHARD
Say she shall be a high and mighty queen.
QUEEN ELIZABETH
To vail the title, as her mother doth.
RICHARD
Say I will love her everlastingly.
QUEEN ELIZABETH
But how long shall that title “ever” last?
RICHARD
Sweetly in force unto her fair life’s end.
QUEEN ELIZABETH
But how long fairly shall her sweet life last?
RICHARD
As long as heaven and nature lengthens it.
QUEEN ELIZABETH
As long as hell and Richard likes of it.
RICHARD
Say I, her sovereign, am her subject low.
QUEEN ELIZABETH
But she, your subject, loathes such sovereignty.
RICHARD
Be eloquent in my behalf to her.
QUEEN ELIZABETH
An honest tale speeds best being plainly told.
RICHARD
Then plainly to her tell my loving tale.
QUEEN ELIZABETH
Plain and not honest is too harsh a style.
RICHARD
Your reasons are too shallow and too quick.
QUEEN ELIZABETH
O no, my reasons are too deep and dead—
Too deep and dead, poor infants, in their graves.
RICHARD
Harp not on that string, madam; that is past.
QUEEN ELIZABETH
Harp on it still shall I till heart-strings break.
RICHARD
Now by my George, my Garter, and my crown—
QUEEN ELIZABETH
Profaned, dishonored, and the third usurped.
RICHARD
I swear—
QUEEN ELIZABETH  By nothing, for this is no oath.
Thy George, profaned, hath lost his lordly honor;
Thy Garter, blemished, pawned his knightly virtue;
Thy crown, usurped, disgraced his kingly glory.
If something thou wouldst swear to be believed,
Swear then by something that thou hast not
wronged.
RICHARD
Then, by myself—
QUEEN ELIZABETH  Thyself is self-misused.
RICHARD
Now, by the world—
QUEEN ELIZABETH  ’Tis full of thy foul wrongs.
RICHARD
My father’s death—
QUEEN ELIZABETH  Thy life hath it dishonored.
RICHARD
Why then, by God.
QUEEN ELIZABETH  God’s wrong is most of all.
If thou didst fear to break an oath with Him,
The unity the King my husband made
Thou hadst not broken, nor my brothers died.
If thou hadst feared to break an oath by Him,
Th’ imperial metal circling now thy head
Had graced the tender temples of my child,
And both the Princes had been breathing here,
Which now, two tender bedfellows for dust,
Thy broken faith hath made the prey for worms.
What canst thou swear by now?
RICHARD  The time to come.
QUEEN ELIZABETH
That thou hast wrongèd in the time o’erpast;
For I myself have many tears to wash
Hereafter time, for time past wronged by thee.
The children live whose fathers thou hast
slaughtered,
Ungoverned youth, to wail it in their age;
The parents live whose children thou hast
butchered,
Old barren plants, to wail it with their age.
Swear not by time to come, for that thou hast
Misused ere used, by times ill-used o’erpast.
RICHARD
As I intend to prosper and repent,
So thrive I in my dangerous affairs
Of hostile arms! Myself myself confound,
Heaven and fortune bar me happy hours,
Day, yield me not thy light, nor night thy rest,
Be opposite all planets of good luck
To my proceeding if, with dear heart’s love,
Immaculate devotion, holy thoughts,
I tender not thy beauteous princely daughter.
In her consists my happiness and thine.
Without her follows to myself and thee,
Herself, the land, and many a Christian soul,
Death, desolation, ruin, and decay.
It cannot be avoided but by this;
It will not be avoided but by this.
Therefore, dear mother—I must call you so—
Be the attorney of my love to her;
Plead what I will be, not what I have been;
Not my deserts, but what I will deserve.
Urge the necessity and state of times,
And be not peevish found in great designs.
QUEEN ELIZABETH
Shall I be tempted of the devil thus?
RICHARD
Ay, if the devil tempt you to do good.
QUEEN ELIZABETH
Shall I forget myself to be myself?
RICHARD
Ay, if your self’s remembrance wrong yourself.
QUEEN ELIZABETH  Yet thou didst kill my children.
RICHARD
But in your daughter’s womb I bury them,
Where, in that nest of spicery, they will breed
Selves of themselves, to your recomforture.
QUEEN ELIZABETH
Shall I go win my daughter to thy will?
RICHARD
And be a happy mother by the deed.
QUEEN ELIZABETH  I go. Write to me very shortly,
And you shall understand from me her mind.
RICHARD
Bear her my true love’s kiss; and so, farewell.
Queen exits.
Relenting fool and shallow, changing woman!
 
Enter Ratcliffe.
 
How now, what news?
RATCLIFFE
Most mighty sovereign, on the western coast
Rideth a puissant navy. To our shores
Throng many doubtful hollow-hearted friends,
Unarmed and unresolved to beat them back.
’Tis thought that Richmond is their admiral;
And there they hull, expecting but the aid
Of Buckingham to welcome them ashore.
RICHARD
Some light-foot friend post to the Duke of
Norfolk—
Ratcliffe thyself, or Catesby. Where is he?
CATESBY
Here, my good lord.
RICHARD  Catesby, fly to the Duke.
CATESBY
I will, my lord, with all convenient haste.
RICHARD
Ratcliffe, come hither. Post to Salisbury.When thou com’st thither—To Catesby. Dull,
unmindful villain,
Why stay’st thou here and go’st not to the Duke?
CATESBY
First, mighty liege, tell me your Highness’ pleasure,
What from your Grace I shall deliver to him.
RICHARD
O true, good Catesby. Bid him levy straight
The greatest strength and power that he can make
And meet me suddenly at Salisbury.
CATESBY  I go.                                                                       	
He exits.
RATCLIFFE
What, may it please you, shall I do at Salisbury?
RICHARD
Why, what wouldst thou do there before I go?
RATCLIFFE
Your Highness told me I should post before.
RICHARD
My mind is changed.
 
Enter Lord Stanley.
 
Stanley, what news with you?
STANLEY
None good, my liege, to please you with the hearing,
Nor none so bad but well may be reported.
RICHARD
Hoyday, a riddle! Neither good nor bad.
What need’st thou run so many miles about
When thou mayst tell thy tale the nearest way?
Once more, what news?
STANLEY  Richmond is on the seas.
RICHARD
There let him sink, and be the seas on him!
White-livered runagate, what doth he there?
STANLEY
I know not, mighty sovereign, but by guess.
RICHARD  Well, as you guess?
STANLEY
Stirred up by Dorset, Buckingham, and Morton,
He makes for England, here to claim the crown.
RICHARD
Is the chair empty? Is the sword unswayed?
Is the King dead, the empire unpossessed?
What heir of York is there alive but we?
And who is England’s king but great York’s heir?
Then tell me, what makes he upon the seas?
STANLEY
Unless for that, my liege, I cannot guess.
RICHARD
Unless for that he comes to be your liege,
You cannot guess wherefore the Welshman comes.
Thou wilt revolt and fly to him, I fear.
STANLEY
No, my good lord. Therefore mistrust me not.
RICHARD
Where is thy power, then, to beat him back?
Where be thy tenants and thy followers?
Are they not now upon the western shore,
Safe-conducting the rebels from their ships?
STANLEY
No, my good lord. My friends are in the north.
RICHARD
Cold friends to me. What do they in the north
When they should serve their sovereign in the west?
STANLEY
They have not been commanded, mighty king.
Pleaseth your Majesty to give me leave,
I’ll muster up my friends and meet your Grace
Where and what time your Majesty shall please.
RICHARD
Ay, thou wouldst be gone to join with Richmond,
But I’ll not trust thee.
STANLEY  Most mighty sovereign,
You have no cause to hold my friendship doubtful.
I never was nor never will be false.
RICHARD
Go then and muster men, but leave behind
Your son George Stanley. Look your heart be firm,
Or else his head’s assurance is but frail.
STANLEY
So deal with him as I prove true to you.
Stanley exits.
 
Enter a Messenger.
 
FIRST MESSENGER
My gracious sovereign, now in Devonshire,
As I by friends am well advertisèd,
Sir Edward Courtney and the haughty prelate,
Bishop of Exeter, his elder brother,
With many more confederates are in arms.
 
Enter another Messenger.
 
SECOND MESSENGER
In Kent, my liege, the Guilfords are in arms,
And every hour more competitors
Flock to the rebels, and their power grows strong.
 
Enter another Messenger.
 
THIRD MESSENGER
My lord, the army of great Buckingham—
RICHARD
Out on you, owls! Nothing but songs of death.
He striketh him.
There, take thou that till thou bring better news.
THIRD MESSENGER
The news I have to tell your Majesty
Is that by sudden floods and fall of waters
Buckingham’s army is dispersed and scattered,
And he himself wandered away alone,
No man knows whither.
RICHARD  I cry thee mercy.
There is my purse to cure that blow of thine.
He gives money.
Hath any well-advisèd friend proclaimed
Reward to him that brings the traitor in?
THIRD MESSENGER
Such proclamation hath been made, my lord.
 
Enter another Messenger.
 
FOURTH MESSENGER
Sir Thomas Lovell and Lord Marquess Dorset,
’Tis said, my liege, in Yorkshire are in arms.
But this good comfort bring I to your Highness:
The Breton navy is dispersed by tempest.
Richmond, in Dorsetshire, sent out a boat
Unto the shore to ask those on the banks
If they were his assistants, yea, or no—
Who answered him they came from Buckingham
Upon his party. He, mistrusting them,
Hoised sail and made his course again for Brittany.
RICHARD
March on, march on, since we are up in arms,
If not to fight with foreign enemies,
Yet to beat down these rebels here at home.
 
Enter Catesby.
 
CATESBY
My liege, the Duke of Buckingham is taken.
That is the best news. That the Earl of Richmond
Is with a mighty power landed at Milford
Is colder tidings, yet they must be told.
RICHARD
Away towards Salisbury! While we reason here,
A royal battle might be won and lost.
Someone take order Buckingham be brought
To Salisbury. The rest march on with me.
Flourish. They exit.
 
Scene 5
Enter Stanley, Earl of Derby, and Sir Christopher.
 
STANLEY
Sir Christopher, tell Richmond this from me:
That in the sty of the most deadly boar
My son George Stanley is franked up in hold;
If I revolt, off goes young George’s head;
The fear of that holds off my present aid.
So get thee gone. Commend me to thy lord.
Withal, say that the Queen hath heartily consented
He should espouse Elizabeth her daughter.
But tell me, where is princely Richmond now?
CHRISTOPHER
At Pembroke, or at Ha’rfordwest in Wales.
STANLEY  What men of name resort to him?
CHRISTOPHER
Sir Walter Herbert, a renownèd soldier;
Sir Gilbert Talbot, Sir William Stanley,
Oxford, redoubted Pembroke, Sir James Blunt,
And Rice ap Thomas, with a valiant crew,
And many other of great name and worth;
And towards London do they bend their power,
If by the way they be not fought withal.
STANLEY, giving Sir Christopher a paper
Well, hie thee to thy lord. I kiss his hand.
My letter will resolve him of my mind.
Farewell.
They exit.
 
 
 

 
 
ACT 5
 
Scene 1
Enter Buckingham, with Sheriff and Halberds, led to
execution.
 
BUCKINGHAM
Will not King Richard let me speak with him?
SHERIFF
No, my good lord. Therefore be patient.
BUCKINGHAM
Hastings and Edward’s children, Grey and Rivers,
Holy King Henry and thy fair son Edward,
Vaughan, and all that have miscarrièd
By underhand, corrupted, foul injustice,
If that your moody, discontented souls
Do through the clouds behold this present hour,
Even for revenge mock my destruction.—
This is All Souls’ Day, fellow, is it not?
SHERIFF  It is.
BUCKINGHAM
Why, then, All Souls’ Day is my body’s doomsday.
This is the day which, in King Edward’s time,
I wished might fall on me when I was found
False to his children and his wife’s allies.
This is the day wherein I wished to fall
By the false faith of him whom most I trusted.
This, this All Souls’ Day to my fearful soul
Is the determined respite of my wrongs.
That high All-seer which I dallied with
Hath turned my feignèd prayer on my head
And given in earnest what I begged in jest.
Thus doth he force the swords of wicked men
To turn their own points in their masters’ bosoms.
Thus Margaret’s curse falls heavy on my neck:
“When he,” quoth she, “shall split thy heart with
sorrow,
Remember Margaret was a prophetess.”—
Come, lead me, officers, to the block of shame.
Wrong hath but wrong, and blame the due of blame.
Buckingham exits with Officers.
 
Scene 2
Enter Richmond, Oxford, Blunt, Herbert, and others,
with Drum and Colors.
 
RICHMOND
Fellows in arms, and my most loving friends,
Bruised underneath the yoke of tyranny,
Thus far into the bowels of the land
Have we marched on without impediment,
And here receive we from our father Stanley
Lines of fair comfort and encouragement.
The wretched, bloody, and usurping boar,
That spoiled your summer fields and fruitful vines,
Swills your warm blood like wash, and makes his
trough
In your embowelled bosoms—this foul swine
Is now even in the center of this isle,
Near to the town of Leicester, as we learn.
From Tamworth thither is but one day’s march.
In God’s name, cheerly on, courageous friends,
To reap the harvest of perpetual peace
By this one bloody trial of sharp war.
OXFORD
Every man’s conscience is a thousand men
To fight against this guilty homicide.
HERBERT
I doubt not but his friends will turn to us.
BLUNT
He hath no friends but what are friends for fear,
Which in his dearest need will fly from him.
RICHMOND
All for our vantage. Then, in God’s name, march.
True hope is swift, and flies with swallow’s wings;
Kings it makes gods, and meaner creatures kings.
All exit.
 
Scene 3
Enter King Richard, in arms, with Norfolk, Ratcliffe, and
the Earl of Surrey, with Soldiers.
 
RICHARD
Here pitch our tent, even here in Bosworth field.
Soldiers begin to pitch the tent.
My lord of Surrey, why look you so sad?
SURREY
My heart is ten times lighter than my looks.
RICHARD
My lord of Norfolk—
NORFOLK  Here, most gracious liege.
RICHARD
Norfolk, we must have knocks, ha, must we not?
NORFOLK
We must both give and take, my loving lord.
RICHARD
Up with my tent!—Here will I lie tonight.
But where tomorrow? Well, all’s one for that.
Who hath descried the number of the traitors?
NORFOLK
Six or seven thousand is their utmost power.
RICHARD
Why, our battalia trebles that account.
Besides, the King’s name is a tower of strength
Which they upon the adverse faction want.—
Up with the tent!—Come, noble gentlemen,
Let us survey the vantage of the ground.
Call for some men of sound direction;
Let’s lack no discipline, make no delay,
For, lords, tomorrow is a busy day.
The tent now in place, they exit.
 
Enter Richmond, Sir William Brandon, Oxford,
Dorset, Herbert, Blunt, and others who set up
Richmond’s tent.
 
RICHMOND
The weary sun hath made a golden set,
And by the bright track of his fiery car
Gives token of a goodly day tomorrow.—
Sir William Brandon, you shall bear my standard.—
Give me some ink and paper in my tent;
I’ll draw the form and model of our battle,
Limit each leader to his several charge,
And part in just proportion our small power.—
My Lord of Oxford, you, Sir William Brandon,
And you, Sir Walter Herbert, stay with me.
The Earl of Pembroke keeps his regiment.—
Good Captain Blunt, bear my goodnight to him,
And by the second hour in the morning
Desire the Earl to see me in my tent.
Yet one thing more, good captain, do for me.
Where is Lord Stanley quartered, do you know?
BLUNT
Unless I have mista’en his colors much,
Which well I am assured I have not done,
His regiment lies half a mile, at least,
South from the mighty power of the King.
RICHMOND
If without peril it be possible,
Sweet Blunt, make some good means to speak with
him,
And give him from me this most needful note.
He gives a paper.
BLUNT
Upon my life, my lord, I’ll undertake it,
And so God give you quiet rest tonight.
RICHMOND
Good night, good Captain Blunt.                                    	
Blunt exits.
Come, gentlemen,
Let us consult upon tomorrow’s business.
Into my tent. The dew is raw and cold.
Richmond, Brandon, Dorset, Herbert, and Oxford
withdraw into the tent. The others exit.
 
Enter to his tent Richard, Ratcliffe, Norfolk, and
Catesby, with Soldiers.
 
RICHARD  What is ’t o’clock?
CATESBY
It’s suppertime, my lord. It’s nine o’clock.
RICHARD
I will not sup tonight. Give me some ink and paper.
What, is my beaver easier than it was,
And all my armor laid into my tent?
CATESBY
It is, my liege, and all things are in readiness.
RICHARD
Good Norfolk, hie thee to thy charge.
Use careful watch. Choose trusty sentinels.
NORFOLK  I go, my lord.
RICHARD
Stir with the lark tomorrow, gentle Norfolk.
NORFOLK  I warrant you, my lord.                                       	
He exits.
RICHARD  Catesby.
CATESBY  My lord.
RICHARD  Send out a pursuivant-at-arms
To Stanley’s regiment. Bid him bring his power
Before sunrising, lest his son George fall
Into the blind cave of eternal night.                            	
Catesby exits.
To Soldiers. Fill me a bowl of wine. Give me a
watch.
Saddle white Surrey for the field tomorrow.
Look that my staves be sound and not too heavy.—
Ratcliffe.
RATCLIFFE  My lord.
RICHARD
Sawst thou the melancholy Lord Northumberland?
RATCLIFFE
Thomas the Earl of Surrey and himself,
Much about cockshut time, from troop to troop
Went through the army cheering up the soldiers.
RICHARD
So, I am satisfied. Give me a bowl of wine.
I have not that alacrity of spirit
Nor cheer of mind that I was wont to have.
Wine is brought.
Set it down. Is ink and paper ready?
RATCLIFFE
It is, my lord.
RICHARD  Bid my guard watch. Leave me.
Ratcliffe, about the mid of night come to my tent
And help to arm me. Leave me, I say.
Ratcliffe exits. Richard sleeps in his tent,
which is guarded by Soldiers.
 
Enter Stanley, Earl of Derby to Richmond in his tent.
 
STANLEY
Fortune and victory sit on thy helm!
RICHMOND
All comfort that the dark night can afford
Be to thy person, noble father-in-law.
Tell me, how fares our loving mother?
STANLEY
I, by attorney, bless thee from thy mother,
Who prays continually for Richmond’s good.
So much for that. The silent hours steal on,
And flaky darkness breaks within the east.
In brief, for so the season bids us be,
Prepare thy battle early in the morning,
And put thy fortune to the arbitrament
Of bloody strokes and mortal-staring war.
I, as I may—that which I would I cannot—
With best advantage will deceive the time
And aid thee in this doubtful shock of arms.
But on thy side I may not be too forward,
Lest, being seen, thy brother, tender George,
Be executed in his father’s sight.
Farewell. The leisure and the fearful time
Cuts off the ceremonious vows of love
And ample interchange of sweet discourse,
Which so-long-sundered friends should dwell upon.
God give us leisure for these rites of love!
Once more, adieu. Be valiant and speed well.
RICHMOND
Good lords, conduct him to his regiment.
I’ll strive with troubled thoughts to take a nap,
Lest leaden slumber peise me down tomorrow
When I should mount with wings of victory.
Once more, good night, kind lords and gentlemen.
 
All but Richmond leave his tent and exit.
Richmond kneels.
O Thou, whose captain I account myself,
Look on my forces with a gracious eye.
Put in their hands Thy bruising irons of wrath,
That they may crush down with a heavy fall
The usurping helmets of our adversaries.
Make us Thy ministers of chastisement,
That we may praise Thee in the victory.
To Thee I do commend my watchful soul,
Ere I let fall the windows of mine eyes.
Sleeping and waking, O, defend me still!                              	
Sleeps.
 
Enter the Ghost of young Prince Edward, son to Harry
the Sixth.
 
GHOST OF EDWARD, (to Richard)
Let me sit heavy on thy soul tomorrow.
Think how thou stabbed’st me in my prime of
youth
At Tewkesbury. Despair therefore, and die!
(To Richmond.) Be cheerful, Richmond, for the
wrongèd souls
Of butchered princes fight in thy behalf.
King Henry’s issue, Richmond, comforts thee.
He exits.
 
Enter the Ghost of Henry the Sixth.
 
GHOST OF HENRY, (to Richard)
When I was mortal, my anointed body
By thee was punchèd full of deadly holes.
Think on the Tower and me. Despair and die!
Harry the Sixth bids thee despair and die.
(To Richmond.) Virtuous and holy, be thou conqueror.
Harry, that prophesied thou shouldst be king,
Doth comfort thee in thy sleep. Live and flourish.
He exits.
 
Enter the Ghost of Clarence.
 
GHOST OF CLARENCE, (to Richard)
Let me sit heavy in thy soul tomorrow,
I, that was washed to death with fulsome wine,
Poor Clarence, by thy guile betrayed to death.
Tomorrow in the battle think on me,
And fall thy edgeless sword. Despair and die!
(To Richmond.) Thou offspring of the house of
Lancaster,
The wrongèd heirs of York do pray for thee.
Good angels guard thy battle. Live and flourish.
He exits.
 
Enter the Ghosts of Rivers, Grey, and Vaughan.
 
GHOST OF RIVERS, (to Richard)
Let me sit heavy in thy soul tomorrow,
Rivers, that died at Pomfret. Despair and die!
GHOST OF GREY, (to Richard)
Think upon Grey, and let thy soul despair!
GHOST OF VAUGHAN, (to Richard)
Think upon Vaughan, and with guilty fear
Let fall thy lance. Despair and die!
ALL, (to Richmond)
Awake, and think our wrongs in Richard’s bosom
Will conquer him. Awake, and win the day.
They exit.
 
Enter the Ghosts of the two young Princes.
 
GHOSTS OF PRINCES, (to Richard)
Dream on thy cousins smothered in the Tower.
Let us be lead within thy bosom, Richard,
And weigh thee down to ruin, shame, and death.
Thy nephews’ souls bid thee despair and die.
(To Richmond.) Sleep, Richmond, sleep in peace
and wake in joy.
Good angels guard thee from the boar’s annoy.
Live, and beget a happy race of kings.
Edward’s unhappy sons do bid thee flourish.
They exit.
 
Enter the Ghost of Hastings.
 
GHOST OF HASTINGS, (to Richard)
Bloody and guilty, guiltily awake,
And in a bloody battle end thy days.
Think on Lord Hastings. Despair and die!
(To Richmond.) Quiet, untroubled soul, awake, awake.
Arm, fight, and conquer for fair England’s sake.
He exits.
 
Enter the Ghost of Lady Anne his wife.
 
GHOST OF ANNE, (to Richard)
Richard, thy wife, that wretched Anne thy wife,
That never slept a quiet hour with thee,
Now fills thy sleep with perturbations.
Tomorrow, in the battle, think on me,
And fall thy edgeless sword. Despair and die!
(To Richmond.) Thou quiet soul, sleep thou a quiet
sleep.
Dream of success and happy victory.
Thy adversary’s wife doth pray for thee.                           	
She exits.
 
Enter the Ghost of Buckingham.
 
GHOST OF BUCKINGHAM, (to Richard)
The first was I that helped thee to the crown;
The last was I that felt thy tyranny.
O, in the battle think on Buckingham,
And die in terror of thy guiltiness.
Dream on, dream on, of bloody deeds and death.
Fainting, despair; despairing, yield thy breath.
(To Richmond.) I died for hope ere I could lend
thee aid,
But cheer thy heart, and be thou not dismayed.
God and good angels fight on Richmond’s side,
And Richard fall in height of all his pride.
He exits.
Richard starteth up out of a dream.
RICHARD
Give me another horse! Bind up my wounds!
Have mercy, Jesu!—Soft, I did but dream.
O coward conscience, how dost thou afflict me!
The lights burn blue; it is now dead midnight.
Cold fearful drops stand on my trembling flesh.
What do I fear? Myself? There’s none else by.
Richard loves Richard, that is, I am I.
Is there a murderer here? No. Yes, I am.
Then fly! What, from myself? Great reason why:
Lest I revenge. What, myself upon myself?
Alack, I love myself. Wherefore? For any good
That I myself have done unto myself?
O, no. Alas, I rather hate myself
For hateful deeds committed by myself.
I am a villain. Yet I lie; I am not.
Fool, of thyself speak well. Fool, do not flatter.
My conscience hath a thousand several tongues,
And every tongue brings in a several tale,
And every tale condemns me for a villain.
Perjury, perjury, in the highest degree;
Murder, stern murder, in the direst degree;
All several sins, all used in each degree,
Throng to the bar, crying all “Guilty, guilty!”
I shall despair. There is no creature loves me,
And if I die no soul will pity me.
And wherefore should they, since that I myself
Find in myself no pity to myself?
Methought the souls of all that I had murdered
Came to my tent, and every one did threat
Tomorrow’s vengeance on the head of Richard.
 
Enter Ratcliffe.
 
RATCLIFFE  My lord.
RICHARD  Zounds, who is there?
RATCLIFFE
Ratcliffe, my lord, ’tis I. The early village cock
Hath twice done salutation to the morn.
Your friends are up and buckle on their armor.
RICHARD
O Ratcliffe, I have dreamed a fearful dream!
What think’st thou, will our friends prove all true?
RATCLIFFE
No doubt, my lord.
RICHARD  O Ratcliffe, I fear, I fear.
RATCLIFFE
Nay, good my lord, be not afraid of shadows.
RICHARD
By the apostle Paul, shadows tonight
Have struck more terror to the soul of Richard
Than can the substance of ten thousand soldiers
Armed in proof and led by shallow Richmond.
’Tis not yet near day. Come, go with me.
Under our tents I’ll play the eavesdropper
To see if any mean to shrink from me.
Richard and Ratcliffe exit.
 
Enter the Lords to Richmond, in his tent.
 
LORDS  Good morrow, Richmond.
RICHMOND
Cry mercy, lords and watchful gentlemen,
That you have ta’en a tardy sluggard here.
A LORD  How have you slept, my lord?
RICHMOND
The sweetest sleep and fairest-boding dreams
That ever entered in a drowsy head
Have I since your departure had, my lords.
Methought their souls whose bodies Richard
murdered
Came to my tent and cried on victory.
I promise you, my soul is very jocund
In the remembrance of so fair a dream.
How far into the morning is it, lords?
A LORD  Upon the stroke of four.
RICHMOND, leaving the tent
Why, then ’tis time to arm and give direction.
 
His oration to his soldiers.
 
More than I have said, loving countrymen,
The leisure and enforcement of the time
Forbids to dwell upon. Yet remember this:
God, and our good cause, fight upon our side.
The prayers of holy saints and wrongèd souls,
Like high-reared bulwarks, stand before our faces.
Richard except, those whom we fight against
Had rather have us win than him they follow.
For what is he they follow? Truly, gentlemen,
A bloody tyrant and a homicide;
One raised in blood, and one in blood established;
One that made means to come by what he hath,
And slaughtered those that were the means to help
him;
A base foul stone, made precious by the foil
Of England’s chair, where he is falsely set;
One that hath ever been God’s enemy.
Then if you fight against God’s enemy,
God will, in justice, ward you as his soldiers.
If you do sweat to put a tyrant down,
You sleep in peace, the tyrant being slain.
If you do fight against your country’s foes,
Your country’s fat shall pay your pains the hire.
If you do fight in safeguard of your wives,
Your wives shall welcome home the conquerors.
If you do free your children from the sword,
Your children’s children quits it in your age.
Then, in the name of God and all these rights,
Advance your standards; draw your willing swords.
For me, the ransom of my bold attempt
Shall be this cold corpse on the Earth’s cold face,
But if I thrive, the gain of my attempt
The least of you shall share his part thereof.
Sound drums and trumpets boldly and cheerfully.
God, and Saint George, Richmond, and victory!
They exit.
 
Enter King Richard, Ratcliffe, and Soldiers.
 
RICHARD
What said Northumberland as touching Richmond?
RATCLIFFE
That he was never trainèd up in arms.
RICHARD
He said the truth. And what said Surrey then?
RATCLIFFE
He smiled and said “The better for our purpose.”
RICHARD
He was in the right, and so indeed it is.
The clock striketh.
Tell the clock there. Give me a calendar.
He looks in an almanac.
Who saw the sun today?
RATCLIFFE  Not I, my lord.
RICHARD
Then he disdains to shine, for by the book
He should have braved the east an hour ago.
A black day will it be to somebody.
Ratcliffe!
RATCLIFFE
My lord.
RICHARD  The sun will not be seen today.
The sky doth frown and lour upon our army.
I would these dewy tears were from the ground.
Not shine today? Why, what is that to me
More than to Richmond, for the selfsame heaven
That frowns on me looks sadly upon him.
 
Enter Norfolk.
 
NORFOLK
Arm, arm, my lord. The foe vaunts in the field.
RICHARD
Come, bustle, bustle. Caparison my horse.—
Call up Lord Stanley; bid him bring his power.—
I will lead forth my soldiers to the plain,
And thus my battle shall be orderèd:
My foreward shall be drawn out all in length,
Consisting equally of horse and foot;
Our archers shall be placèd in the midst.
John Duke of Norfolk, Thomas Earl of Surrey,
Shall have the leading of this foot and horse.
They thus directed, we will follow
In the main battle, whose puissance on either side
Shall be well wingèd with our chiefest horse.
This, and Saint George to boot!—What think’st
thou, Norfolk?
NORFOLK
A good direction, warlike sovereign.
He sheweth him a paper.
This found I on my tent this morning.
RICHARD reads
       	Jockey of Norfolk, be not so bold.
       	For Dickon thy master is bought and sold.
A thing devisèd by the enemy.—
Go, gentlemen, every man unto his charge.
Let not our babbling dreams affright our souls.
Conscience is but a word that cowards use,
Devised at first to keep the strong in awe.
Our strong arms be our conscience, swords our law.
March on. Join bravely. Let us to it pell mell,
If not to heaven, then hand in hand to hell.
 
His oration to his army.
 
What shall I say more than I have inferred?
Remember whom you are to cope withal,
A sort of vagabonds, rascals, and runaways,
A scum of Bretons and base lackey peasants,
Whom their o’ercloyèd country vomits forth
To desperate adventures and assured destruction.
You sleeping safe, they bring to you unrest;
You having lands and blessed with beauteous wives,
They would restrain the one, distain the other.
And who doth lead them but a paltry fellow,
Long kept in Brittany at our mother’s cost,
A milksop, one that never in his life
Felt so much cold as overshoes in snow?
Let’s whip these stragglers o’er the seas again,
Lash hence these overweening rags of France,
These famished beggars weary of their lives,
Who, but for dreaming on this fond exploit,
For want of means, poor rats, had hanged
themselves.
If we be conquered, let men conquer us,
And not these bastard Bretons, whom our fathers
Have in their own land beaten, bobbed, and
thumped,
And in record left them the heirs of shame.
Shall these enjoy our lands, lie with our wives,
Ravish our daughters?                                                 	
Drum afar off.
Hark, I hear their drum.
Fight, gentlemen of England.—Fight, bold
yeomen.—
Draw, archers; draw your arrows to the head.—
Spur your proud horses hard, and ride in blood.
Amaze the welkin with your broken staves.—
 
Enter a Messenger.
 
What says Lord Stanley? Will he bring his power?
MESSENGER  My lord, he doth deny to come.
RICHARD  Off with his son George’s head!
NORFOLK
My lord, the enemy is past the marsh.
After the battle let George Stanley die.
RICHARD
A thousand hearts are great within my bosom.
Advance our standards. Set upon our foes.
Our ancient word of courage, fair Saint George,
Inspire us with the spleen of fiery dragons.
Upon them! Victory sits on our helms.
They exit.
 
Scene 4
Alarum. Excursions. Enter Norfolk, with Soldiers, and
Catesby.
 
CATESBY
Rescue, my lord of Norfolk, rescue, rescue!
The King enacts more wonders than a man,
Daring an opposite to every danger.
His horse is slain, and all on foot he fights,
Seeking for Richmond in the throat of death.
Rescue, fair lord, or else the day is lost.
Norfolk exits with Soldiers.
 
Alarums. Enter Richard.
 
RICHARD
A horse, a horse, my kingdom for a horse!
CATESBY
Withdraw, my lord. I’ll help you to a horse.
RICHARD
Slave, I have set my life upon a cast,
And I will stand the hazard of the die.
I think there be six Richmonds in the field;
Five have I slain today instead of him.
A horse, a horse, my kingdom for a horse!
They exit.
 
Scene 5
Alarum. Enter Richard and Richmond. They fight.
Richard is slain. Then retreat being sounded, Richmond
exits, and Richard’s body is removed. Flourish. Enter
Richmond, Stanley, Earl of Derby, bearing the crown,
with other Lords, and Soldiers.
 
RICHMOND
God and your arms be praised, victorious friends!
The day is ours; the bloody dog is dead.
STANLEY, offering him the crown
Courageous Richmond, well hast thou acquit thee.
Lo, here this long-usurpèd royalty
From the dead temples of this bloody wretch
Have I plucked off, to grace thy brows withal.
Wear it, enjoy it, and make much of it.
RICHMOND
Great God of heaven, say amen to all!
But tell me, is young George Stanley living?
STANLEY
He is, my lord, and safe in Leicester town,
Whither, if it please you, we may now withdraw us.
RICHMOND
What men of name are slain on either side?
STANLEY
John, Duke of Norfolk, Walter, Lord Ferrers,
Sir Robert Brakenbury, and Sir William Brandon.
RICHMOND
Inter their bodies as becomes their births.
Proclaim a pardon to the soldiers fled
That in submission will return to us.
And then, as we have ta’en the sacrament,
We will unite the white rose and the red;
Smile heaven upon this fair conjunction,
That long have frowned upon their enmity.
What traitor hears me and says not “Amen”?
England hath long been mad and scarred herself:
The brother blindly shed the brother’s blood;
The father rashly slaughtered his own son;
The son, compelled, been butcher to the sire.
All this divided York and Lancaster,
Divided in their dire division.
O, now let Richmond and Elizabeth,
The true succeeders of each royal house,
By God’s fair ordinance conjoin together,
And let their heirs, God, if Thy will be so,
Enrich the time to come with smooth-faced peace,
With smiling plenty and fair prosperous days.
Abate the edge of traitors, gracious Lord,
That would reduce these bloody days again
And make poor England weep in streams of blood.
Let them not live to taste this land’s increase,
That would with treason wound this fair land’s peace.
Now civil wounds are stopped, peace lives again.
That she may long live here, God say amen.
They exit.
 

Othello
 
 
ACT 1
 
Scene 1
Enter Roderigo and Iago.
 
RODERIGO
Tush, never tell me! I take it much unkindly
That thou, Iago, who hast had my purse
As if the strings were thine, shouldst know of this.
IAGO  ’Sblood, but you’ll not hear me!
If ever I did dream of such a matter,
Abhor me.
RODERIGO
Thou toldst me thou didst hold him in thy hate.
IAGO  Despise me
If I do not. Three great ones of the city,
In personal suit to make me his lieutenant,
Off-capped to him; and, by the faith of man,
I know my price, I am worth no worse a place.
But he, as loving his own pride and purposes,
Evades them with a bombast circumstance,
Horribly stuffed with epithets of war,
And in conclusion,
Nonsuits my mediators. For “Certes,” says he,
“I have already chose my officer.”
And what was he?
Forsooth, a great arithmetician,
One Michael Cassio, a Florentine,
A fellow almost damned in a fair wife,
That never set a squadron in the field,
Nor the division of a battle knows
More than a spinster—unless the bookish theoric,
Wherein the togèd consuls can propose
As masterly as he. Mere prattle without practice
Is all his soldiership. But he, sir, had th’ election;
And I, of whom his eyes had seen the proof
At Rhodes, at Cyprus, and on other grounds
Christened and heathen, must be beleed and
calmed
By debitor and creditor. This countercaster,
He, in good time, must his lieutenant be,
And I, God bless the mark, his Moorship’s ancient.
RODERIGO
By heaven, I rather would have been his hangman.
IAGO
Why, there’s no remedy. ’Tis the curse of service.
Preferment goes by letter and affection,
And not by old gradation, where each second
Stood heir to th’ first. Now, sir, be judge yourself
Whether I in any just term am affined
To love the Moor.
RODERIGO
I would not follow him, then.
IAGO  O, sir, content you.
I follow him to serve my turn upon him.
We cannot all be masters, nor all masters
Cannot be truly followed. You shall mark
Many a duteous and knee-crooking knave
That, doting on his own obsequious bondage,
Wears out his time, much like his master’s ass,
For naught but provender, and when he’s old,
cashiered.
Whip me such honest knaves! Others there are
Who, trimmed in forms and visages of duty,
Keep yet their hearts attending on themselves,
And, throwing but shows of service on their lords,
Do well thrive by them; and when they have lined
their coats,
Do themselves homage. These fellows have some
soul,
And such a one do I profess myself. For, sir,
It is as sure as you are Roderigo,
Were I the Moor I would not be Iago.
In following him, I follow but myself.
Heaven is my judge, not I for love and duty,
But seeming so for my peculiar end.
For when my outward action doth demonstrate
The native act and figure of my heart
In complement extern, ’tis not long after
But I will wear my heart upon my sleeve
For daws to peck at. I am not what I am.
RODERIGO
What a full fortune does the thick-lips owe
If he can carry ’t thus!
IAGO  Call up her father.
Rouse him. Make after him, poison his delight,
Proclaim him in the streets; incense her kinsmen,
And, though he in a fertile climate dwell,
Plague him with flies. Though that his joy be joy,
Yet throw such chances of vexation on ’t
As it may lose some color.
RODERIGO
Here is her father’s house. I’ll call aloud.
IAGO
Do, with like timorous accent and dire yell
As when, by night and negligence, the fire
Is spied in populous cities.
RODERIGO
What ho, Brabantio! Signior Brabantio, ho!
IAGO
Awake! What ho, Brabantio! Thieves, thieves!
Look to your house, your daughter, and your bags!
Thieves, thieves!
 
Enter Brabantio, above.
 
BRABANTIO
What is the reason of this terrible summons?
What is the matter there?
RODERIGO
Signior, is all your family within?
IAGO
Are your doors locked?
BRABANTIO  Why, wherefore ask you this?
IAGO
Zounds, sir, you’re robbed. For shame, put on your
gown!
Your heart is burst. You have lost half your soul.
Even now, now, very now, an old black ram
Is tupping your white ewe. Arise, arise!
Awake the snorting citizens with the bell,
Or else the devil will make a grandsire of you.
Arise, I say!
BRABANTIO  What, have you lost your wits?
RODERIGO
Most reverend signior, do you know my voice?
BRABANTIO  Not I. What are you?
RODERIGO
My name is Roderigo.
BRABANTIO  The worser welcome.
I have charged thee not to haunt about my doors.
In honest plainness thou hast heard me say
My daughter is not for thee. And now in madness,
Being full of supper and distemp’ring draughts,
Upon malicious bravery dost thou come
To start my quiet.
RODERIGO  Sir, sir, sir—
BRABANTIO  But thou must needs be sure
My spirit and my place have in them power
To make this bitter to thee.
RODERIGO
Patience, good sir.
BRABANTIO  What tell’st thou me of robbing?
This is Venice. My house is not a grange.
RODERIGO  Most grave Brabantio,
In simple and pure soul I come to you—
IAGO  Zounds, sir, you are one of those that will not
serve God if the devil bid you. Because we come to
do you service and you think we are ruffians, you’ll
have your daughter covered with a Barbary horse,
you’ll have your nephews neigh to you, you’ll have
coursers for cousins and jennets for germans.
BRABANTIO  What profane wretch art thou?
IAGO  I am one, sir, that comes to tell you your daughter
and the Moor are now making the beast with
two backs.
BRABANTIO  Thou art a villain.
IAGO  You are a senator.
BRABANTIO
This thou shalt answer. I know thee, Roderigo.
RODERIGO
Sir, I will answer anything. But I beseech you,
If ’t be your pleasure and most wise consent—
As partly I find it is—that your fair daughter,
At this odd-even and dull watch o’ th’ night,
Transported with no worse nor better guard
But with a knave of common hire, a gondolier,
To the gross clasps of a lascivious Moor:
If this be known to you, and your allowance,
We then have done you bold and saucy wrongs.
But if you know not this, my manners tell me
We have your wrong rebuke. Do not believe
That from the sense of all civility
I thus would play and trifle with your Reverence.
Your daughter, if you have not given her leave,
I say again, hath made a gross revolt,
Tying her duty, beauty, wit, and fortunes
In an extravagant and wheeling stranger
Of here and everywhere. Straight satisfy yourself.
If she be in her chamber or your house,
Let loose on me the justice of the state
For thus deluding you.
BRABANTIO  Strike on the tinder, ho!
Give me a taper. Call up all my people.
This accident is not unlike my dream.
Belief of it oppresses me already.
Light, I say, light!                                                                 	
He exits.
IAGO, to Roderigo  Farewell, for I must leave you.
It seems not meet nor wholesome to my place
To be producted, as if I stay I shall,
Against the Moor. For I do know the state,
However this may gall him with some check,
Cannot with safety cast him, for he’s embarked
With such loud reason to the Cyprus wars,
Which even now stands in act, that, for their souls,
Another of his fathom they have none
To lead their business. In which regard,
Though I do hate him as I do hell pains,
Yet, for necessity of present life,
I must show out a flag and sign of love—
Which is indeed but sign. That you shall surely find
him,
Lead to the Sagittary the raisèd search,
And there will I be with him. So, farewell.                         	
He exits.
 
Enter Brabantio in his nightgown, with Servants and
Torches.
 
BRABANTIO
It is too true an evil. Gone she is,
And what’s to come of my despisèd time
Is naught but bitterness.—Now, Roderigo,
Where didst thou see her?—O, unhappy girl!—
With the Moor, sayst thou?—Who would be a
father?—
How didst thou know ’twas she?—O, she deceives
me
Past thought!—What said she to you?—Get more
tapers.
Raise all my kindred.—Are they married, think
you?
RODERIGO  Truly, I think they are.
BRABANTIO
O heaven! How got she out? O treason of the blood!
Fathers, from hence trust not your daughters’ minds
By what you see them act.—Is there not charms
By which the property of youth and maidhood
May be abused? Have you not read, Roderigo,
Of some such thing?
RODERIGO  Yes, sir, I have indeed.
BRABANTIO
Call up my brother.—O, would you had had her!—
Some one way, some another.—Do you know
Where we may apprehend her and the Moor?
RODERIGO
I think I can discover him, if you please
To get good guard and go along with me.
BRABANTIO
Pray you lead on. At every house I’ll call.
I may command at most.—Get weapons, ho!
And raise some special officers of night.—
On, good Roderigo. I will deserve your pains.
They exit.
 
Scene 2
Enter Othello, Iago, Attendants, with Torches.
 
IAGO
Though in the trade of war I have slain men,
Yet do I hold it very stuff o’ th’ conscience
To do no contrived murder. I lack iniquity
Sometimes to do me service. Nine or ten times
I had thought t’ have yerked him here under the
ribs.
OTHELLO
’Tis better as it is.
IAGO  Nay, but he prated
And spoke such scurvy and provoking terms
Against your Honor,
That with the little godliness I have
I did full hard forbear him. But I pray you, sir,
Are you fast married? Be assured of this,
That the magnifico is much beloved,
And hath in his effect a voice potential
As double as the Duke’s. He will divorce you
Or put upon you what restraint or grievance
The law (with all his might to enforce it on)
Will give him cable.
OTHELLO  Let him do his spite.
My services which I have done the signiory
Shall out-tongue his complaints. ’Tis yet to know
(Which, when I know that boasting is an honor,
I shall promulgate) I fetch my life and being
From men of royal siege, and my demerits
May speak unbonneted to as proud a fortune
As this that I have reached. For know, Iago,
But that I love the gentle Desdemona,
I would not my unhousèd free condition
Put into circumscription and confine
For the sea’s worth. But look, what lights come
yond?
IAGO
Those are the raisèd father and his friends.
You were best go in.
OTHELLO  Not I. I must be found.
My parts, my title, and my perfect soul
Shall manifest me rightly. Is it they?
IAGO  By Janus, I think no.
 
Enter Cassio, with Officers, and Torches.
 
OTHELLO
The servants of the Duke and my lieutenant!
The goodness of the night upon you, friends.
What is the news?
CASSIO  The Duke does greet you, general,
And he requires your haste-post-haste appearance,
Even on the instant.
OTHELLO  What is the matter, think you?
CASSIO
Something from Cyprus, as I may divine.
It is a business of some heat. The galleys
Have sent a dozen sequent messengers
This very night at one another’s heels,
And many of the Consuls, raised and met,
Are at the Duke’s already. You have been hotly
called for.
When, being not at your lodging to be found,
The Senate hath sent about three several quests
To search you out.
OTHELLO  ’Tis well I am found by you.
I will but spend a word here in the house
And go with you.                                                                  	
He exits.
CASSIO  Ancient, what makes he here?
IAGO
Faith, he tonight hath boarded a land carrack.
If it prove lawful prize, he’s made forever.
CASSIO
I do not understand.
IAGO  He’s married.
CASSIO  To who?
IAGO
Marry, to—
 
Reenter Othello.
 
Come, captain, will you go?
OTHELLO  Have with you.
CASSIO
Here comes another troop to seek for you.
 
Enter Brabantio, Roderigo, with Officers, and Torches.
 
IAGO
It is Brabantio. General, be advised,
He comes to bad intent.
OTHELLO  Holla, stand there!
RODERIGO
Signior, it is the Moor.
BRABANTIO  Down with him,
thief!
They draw their swords.
IAGO
You, Roderigo! Come, sir, I am for you.
OTHELLO
Keep up your bright swords, for the dew will rust
them.
Good signior, you shall more command with years
Than with your weapons.
BRABANTIO
O, thou foul thief, where hast thou stowed my
daughter?
Damned as thou art, thou hast enchanted her!
For I’ll refer me to all things of sense,
If she in chains of magic were not bound,
Whether a maid so tender, fair, and happy,
So opposite to marriage that she shunned
The wealthy curlèd darlings of our nation,
Would ever have, t’ incur a general mock,
Run from her guardage to the sooty bosom
Of such a thing as thou—to fear, not to delight!
Judge me the world, if ’tis not gross in sense
That thou hast practiced on her with foul charms,
Abused her delicate youth with drugs or minerals
That weakens motion. I’ll have ’t disputed on.
’Tis probable, and palpable to thinking.
I therefore apprehend and do attach thee
For an abuser of the world, a practicer
Of arts inhibited and out of warrant.—
Lay hold upon him. If he do resist,
Subdue him at his peril.
OTHELLO  Hold your hands,
Both you of my inclining and the rest.
Were it my cue to fight, I should have known it
Without a prompter.—Whither will you that I go
To answer this your charge?
BRABANTIO  To prison, till fit time
Of law and course of direct session
Call thee to answer.
OTHELLO  What if I do obey?
How may the Duke be therewith satisfied,
Whose messengers are here about my side,
Upon some present business of the state,
To bring me to him?
OFFICER  ’Tis true, most worthy signior.
The Duke’s in council, and your noble self
I am sure is sent for.
BRABANTIO  How? The Duke in council?
In this time of the night? Bring him away;
Mine’s not an idle cause. The Duke himself,
Or any of my brothers of the state,
Cannot but feel this wrong as ’twere their own.
For if such actions may have passage free,
Bondslaves and pagans shall our statesmen be.
They exit.
 
Scene 3
Enter Duke, Senators, and Officers.
 
DUKE, reading a paper
There’s no composition in these news
That gives them credit.
FIRST SENATOR, reading a paper
Indeed, they are disproportioned.
My letters say a hundred and seven galleys.
DUKE
And mine, a hundred forty.
SECOND SENATOR, reading a paper
And mine, two hundred.
But though they jump not on a just account
(As in these cases, where the aim reports
’Tis oft with difference), yet do they all confirm
A Turkish fleet, and bearing up to Cyprus.
DUKE
Nay, it is possible enough to judgment.
I do not so secure me in the error,
But the main article I do approve
In fearful sense.
SAILOR, within  What ho, what ho, what ho!
 
Enter Sailor.
 
OFFICER  A messenger from the galleys.
DUKE  Now, what’s the business?
SAILOR
The Turkish preparation makes for Rhodes.
So was I bid report here to the state
By Signior Angelo.                                                               	
He exits.
DUKE
How say you by this change?
FIRST SENATOR  This cannot be,
By no assay of reason. ’Tis a pageant
To keep us in false gaze. When we consider
Th’ importancy of Cyprus to the Turk,
And let ourselves again but understand
That, as it more concerns the Turk than Rhodes,
So may he with more facile question bear it,
For that it stands not in such warlike brace,
But altogether lacks th’ abilities
That Rhodes is dressed in—if we make thought of
this,
We must not think the Turk is so unskillful
To leave that latest which concerns him first,
Neglecting an attempt of ease and gain
To wake and wage a danger profitless.
DUKE
Nay, in all confidence, he’s not for Rhodes.
OFFICER  Here is more news.
 
Enter a Messenger.
 
MESSENGER
The Ottomites, Reverend and Gracious,
Steering with due course toward the isle of Rhodes,
Have there injointed them with an after fleet.
FIRST SENATOR
Ay, so I thought. How many, as you guess?
MESSENGER
Of thirty sail; and now they do restem
Their backward course, bearing with frank
appearance
Their purposes toward Cyprus. Signior Montano,
Your trusty and most valiant servitor,
With his free duty recommends you thus,
And prays you to believe him.                                             	
He exits.
DUKE  ’Tis certain, then, for Cyprus.
Marcus Luccicos, is not he in town?
FIRST SENATOR
He’s now in Florence.
DUKE  Write from us to him.
Post-post-haste. Dispatch.
FIRST SENATOR
Here comes Brabantio and the valiant Moor.
 
Enter Brabantio, Othello, Cassio, Iago, Roderigo, and
Officers.
 
DUKE
Valiant Othello, we must straight employ you
Against the general enemy Ottoman.
To Brabantio. I did not see you. Welcome, gentle
signior.
We lacked your counsel and your help tonight.
BRABANTIO
So did I yours. Good your Grace, pardon me.
Neither my place nor aught I heard of business
Hath raised me from my bed, nor doth the general
care
Take hold on me, for my particular grief
Is of so floodgate and o’erbearing nature
That it engluts and swallows other sorrows
And it is still itself.
DUKE  Why, what’s the matter?
BRABANTIO
My daughter! O, my daughter!
FIRST SENATOR  Dead?
BRABANTIO  Ay, to me.
She is abused, stol’n from me, and corrupted
By spells and medicines bought of mountebanks;
For nature so prepost’rously to err—
Being not deficient, blind, or lame of sense—
Sans witchcraft could not.
DUKE
Whoe’er he be that in this foul proceeding
Hath thus beguiled your daughter of herself
And you of her, the bloody book of law
You shall yourself read in the bitter letter,
After your own sense, yea, though our proper son
Stood in your action.
BRABANTIO  Humbly I thank your Grace.
Here is the man—this Moor, whom now it seems
Your special mandate for the state affairs
Hath hither brought.
ALL  We are very sorry for ’t.
DUKE, to Othello
What, in your own part, can you say to this?
BRABANTIO  Nothing, but this is so.
OTHELLO
Most potent, grave, and reverend signiors,
My very noble and approved good masters:
That I have ta’en away this old man’s daughter,
It is most true; true I have married her.
The very head and front of my offending
Hath this extent, no more. Rude am I in my speech,
And little blessed with the soft phrase of peace;
For since these arms of mine had seven years’ pith,
Till now some nine moons wasted, they have used
Their dearest action in the tented field,
And little of this great world can I speak
More than pertains to feats of broil and battle.
And therefore little shall I grace my cause
In speaking for myself. Yet, by your gracious
patience,
I will a round unvarnished tale deliver
Of my whole course of love—what drugs, what
charms,
What conjuration, and what mighty magic
(For such proceeding I am charged withal)
I won his daughter.
BRABANTIO  A maiden never bold,
Of spirit so still and quiet that her motion
Blushed at herself. And she, in spite of nature,
Of years, of country, credit, everything,
To fall in love with what she feared to look on!
It is a judgment maimed and most imperfect
That will confess perfection so could err
Against all rules of nature, and must be driven
To find out practices of cunning hell
Why this should be. I therefore vouch again
That with some mixtures powerful o’er the blood,
Or with some dram conjured to this effect,
He wrought upon her.
DUKE  To vouch this is no proof
Without more wider and more overt test
Than these thin habits and poor likelihoods
Of modern seeming do prefer against him.
FIRST SENATOR  But, Othello, speak:
Did you by indirect and forcèd courses
Subdue and poison this young maid’s affections?
Or came it by request, and such fair question
As soul to soul affordeth?
OTHELLO  I do beseech you,
Send for the lady to the Sagittary
And let her speak of me before her father.
If you do find me foul in her report,
The trust, the office I do hold of you,
Not only take away, but let your sentence
Even fall upon my life.
DUKE  Fetch Desdemona hither.
OTHELLO
Ancient, conduct them. You best know the place.
Iago and Attendants exit.
And till she come, as truly as to heaven
I do confess the vices of my blood,
So justly to your grave ears I’ll present
How I did thrive in this fair lady’s love,
And she in mine.
DUKE  Say it, Othello.
OTHELLO
Her father loved me, oft invited me,
Still questioned me the story of my life
From year to year—the battles, sieges, fortunes
That I have passed.
I ran it through, even from my boyish days
To th’ very moment that he bade me tell it,
Wherein I spoke of most disastrous chances:
Of moving accidents by flood and field,
Of hairbreadth ’scapes i’ th’ imminent deadly
breach,
Of being taken by the insolent foe
And sold to slavery, of my redemption thence,
And portance in my traveler’s history,
Wherein of antres vast and deserts idle,
Rough quarries, rocks, and hills whose heads
touch heaven,
It was my hint to speak—such was my process—
And of the cannibals that each other eat,
The Anthropophagi, and men whose heads
Do grow beneath their shoulders. These things to
hear
Would Desdemona seriously incline.
But still the house affairs would draw her thence,
Which ever as she could with haste dispatch
She’d come again, and with a greedy ear
Devour up my discourse. Which I, observing,
Took once a pliant hour, and found good means
To draw from her a prayer of earnest heart
That I would all my pilgrimage dilate,
Whereof by parcels she had something heard,
But not intentively. I did consent,
And often did beguile her of her tears
When I did speak of some distressful stroke
That my youth suffered. My story being done,
She gave me for my pains a world of sighs.
She swore, in faith, ’twas strange, ’twas passing
strange,
’Twas pitiful, ’twas wondrous pitiful.
She wished she had not heard it, yet she wished
That heaven had made her such a man. She thanked
me,
And bade me, if I had a friend that loved her,
I should but teach him how to tell my story,
And that would woo her. Upon this hint I spake.
She loved me for the dangers I had passed,
And I loved her that she did pity them.
This only is the witchcraft I have used.
Here comes the lady. Let her witness it.
 
Enter Desdemona, Iago, Attendants.
 
DUKE
I think this tale would win my daughter, too.
Good Brabantio,
Take up this mangled matter at the best.
Men do their broken weapons rather use
Than their bare hands.
BRABANTIO  I pray you hear her speak.
If she confess that she was half the wooer,
Destruction on my head if my bad blame
Light on the man.—Come hither, gentle mistress.
Do you perceive in all this noble company
Where most you owe obedience?
DESDEMONA  My noble father,
I do perceive here a divided duty.
To you I am bound for life and education.
My life and education both do learn me
How to respect you. You are the lord of duty.
I am hitherto your daughter. But here’s my
husband.
And so much duty as my mother showed
To you, preferring you before her father,
So much I challenge that I may profess
Due to the Moor my lord.
BRABANTIO  God be with you! I have done.
Please it your Grace, on to the state affairs.
I had rather to adopt a child than get it.—
Come hither, Moor.
I here do give thee that with all my heart
Which, but thou hast already, with all my heart
I would keep from thee.—For your sake, jewel,
I am glad at soul I have no other child,
For thy escape would teach me tyranny,
To hang clogs on them.—I have done, my lord.
DUKE
Let me speak like yourself and lay a sentence,
Which as a grise or step may help these lovers
Into your favor.
When remedies are past, the griefs are ended
By seeing the worst, which late on hopes depended.
To mourn a mischief that is past and gone
Is the next way to draw new mischief on.
What cannot be preserved when fortune takes,
Patience her injury a mock’ry makes.
The robbed that smiles steals something from the
thief;
He robs himself that spends a bootless grief.
BRABANTIO
So let the Turk of Cyprus us beguile,
We lose it not so long as we can smile.
He bears the sentence well that nothing bears
But the free comfort which from thence he hears;
But he bears both the sentence and the sorrow
That, to pay grief, must of poor patience borrow.
These sentences to sugar or to gall,
Being strong on both sides, are equivocal.
But words are words. I never yet did hear
That the bruised heart was piercèd through the
ear.
I humbly beseech you, proceed to th’ affairs of
state.
DUKE  The Turk with a most mighty preparation makes
for Cyprus. Othello, the fortitude of the place is
best known to you. And though we have there a
substitute of most allowed sufficiency, yet opinion, a
sovereign mistress of effects, throws a more safer
voice on you. You must therefore be content to
slubber the gloss of your new fortunes with this
more stubborn and boist’rous expedition.
OTHELLO
The tyrant custom, most grave senators,
Hath made the flinty and steel couch of war
My thrice-driven bed of down. I do agnize
A natural and prompt alacrity
I find in hardness, and do undertake
This present wars against the Ottomites.
Most humbly, therefore, bending to your state,
I crave fit disposition for my wife,
Due reference of place and exhibition,
With such accommodation and besort
As levels with her breeding.
DUKE
Why, at her father’s.
BRABANTIO  I will not have it so.
OTHELLO  Nor I.
DESDEMONA  Nor would I there reside
To put my father in impatient thoughts
By being in his eye. Most gracious duke,
To my unfolding lend your prosperous ear
And let me find a charter in your voice
T’ assist my simpleness.
DUKE  What would you, Desdemona?
DESDEMONA
That I love the Moor to live with him
My downright violence and storm of fortunes
May trumpet to the world. My heart’s subdued
Even to the very quality of my lord.
I saw Othello’s visage in his mind,
And to his honors and his valiant parts
Did I my soul and fortunes consecrate.
So that, dear lords, if I be left behind,
A moth of peace, and he go to the war,
The rites for why I love him are bereft me
And I a heavy interim shall support
By his dear absence. Let me go with him.
OTHELLO  Let her have your voice.
Vouch with me, heaven, I therefore beg it not
To please the palate of my appetite,
Nor to comply with heat (the young affects
In me defunct) and proper satisfaction,
But to be free and bounteous to her mind.
And heaven defend your good souls that you think
I will your serious and great business scant
For she is with me. No, when light-winged toys
Of feathered Cupid seel with wanton dullness
My speculative and officed instruments,
That my disports corrupt and taint my business,
Let housewives make a skillet of my helm,
And all indign and base adversities
Make head against my estimation.
DUKE
Be it as you shall privately determine,
Either for her stay or going. Th’ affair cries haste,
And speed must answer it.
FIRST SENATOR
You must away tonight.
OTHELLO  With all my
heart.
DUKE
At nine i’ th’ morning here we’ll meet again.
Othello, leave some officer behind
And he shall our commission bring to you,
With such things else of quality and respect
As doth import you.
OTHELLO  So please your Grace, my
ancient.
A man he is of honesty and trust.
To his conveyance I assign my wife,
With what else needful your good Grace shall think
To be sent after me.
DUKE  Let it be so.
Good night to everyone. To Brabantio. And, noble
signior,
If virtue no delighted beauty lack,
Your son-in-law is far more fair than black.
FIRST SENATOR
Adieu, brave Moor, use Desdemona well.
BRABANTIO
Look to her, Moor, if thou hast eyes to see.
She has deceived her father, and may thee.                        	
He exits.
OTHELLO
My life upon her faith!
The Duke, the Senators, Cassio, and Officers exit.
Honest Iago,
My Desdemona must I leave to thee.
I prithee let thy wife attend on her,
And bring them after in the best advantage.—
Come, Desdemona, I have but an hour
Of love, of worldly matters, and direction
To spend with thee. We must obey the time.
Othello and Desdemona exit.
RODERIGO  Iago—
IAGO  What sayst thou, noble heart?
RODERIGO  What will I do, think’st thou?
IAGO  Why, go to bed and sleep.
RODERIGO  I will incontinently drown myself.
IAGO  If thou dost, I shall never love thee after. Why,
thou silly gentleman!
RODERIGO  It is silliness to live, when to live is torment,
and then have we a prescription to die when death is
our physician.
IAGO  O, villainous! I have looked upon the world for
four times seven years, and since I could distinguish
betwixt a benefit and an injury, I never found
man that knew how to love himself. Ere I would say
I would drown myself for the love of a guinea hen, I
would change my humanity with a baboon.
RODERIGO  What should I do? I confess it is my shame
to be so fond, but it is not in my virtue to amend it.
IAGO  Virtue? A fig! ’Tis in ourselves that we are thus or
thus. Our bodies are our gardens, to the which our
wills are gardeners. So that if we will plant nettles
or sow lettuce, set hyssop and weed up thyme,
supply it with one gender of herbs or distract it
with many, either to have it sterile with idleness or
manured with industry, why the power and corrigible
authority of this lies in our wills. If the balance
of our lives had not one scale of reason to poise
another of sensuality, the blood and baseness of our
natures would conduct us to most prepost’rous
conclusions. But we have reason to cool our raging
motions, our carnal stings, our unbitted lusts—
whereof I take this that you call love to be a sect, or
scion.
RODERIGO  It cannot be.
IAGO  It is merely a lust of the blood and a permission
of the will. Come, be a man! Drown thyself? Drown
cats and blind puppies. I have professed me thy
friend, and I confess me knit to thy deserving
with cables of perdurable toughness. I could never
better stead thee than now. Put money in thy purse.
Follow thou the wars; defeat thy favor with an
usurped beard. I say, put money in thy purse. It
cannot be that Desdemona should long continue
her love to the Moor—put money in thy purse—
nor he his to her. It was a violent commencement in
her, and thou shalt see an answerable sequestration
—put but money in thy purse. These Moors are
changeable in their wills. Fill thy purse with money.
The food that to him now is as luscious as locusts
shall be to him shortly as bitter as coloquintida.
She must change for youth. When she is sated
with his body she will find the error of her choice.
Therefore, put money in thy purse. If thou wilt
needs damn thyself, do it a more delicate way than
drowning. Make all the money thou canst. If sanctimony
and a frail vow betwixt an erring barbarian
and a supersubtle Venetian be not too hard for my
wits and all the tribe of hell, thou shalt enjoy her.
Therefore make money. A pox of drowning thyself!
It is clean out of the way. Seek thou rather to be
hanged in compassing thy joy than to be drowned
and go without her.
RODERIGO  Wilt thou be fast to my hopes if I depend on
the issue?
IAGO  Thou art sure of me. Go, make money. I have
told thee often, and I retell thee again and again, I
hate the Moor. My cause is hearted; thine hath no
less reason. Let us be conjunctive in our revenge
against him. If thou canst cuckold him, thou dost
thyself a pleasure, me a sport. There are many
events in the womb of time which will be delivered.
Traverse, go, provide thy money. We will have more
of this tomorrow. Adieu.
RODERIGO  Where shall we meet i’ th’ morning?
IAGO  At my lodging.
RODERIGO  I’ll be with thee betimes.
IAGO  Go to, farewell. Do you hear, Roderigo?
RODERIGO  What say you?
IAGO  No more of drowning, do you hear?
RODERIGO  I am changed.
IAGO  Go to, farewell. Put money enough in your
purse.
RODERIGO  I’ll sell all my land.                                           	
He exits.
IAGO
Thus do I ever make my fool my purse.
For I mine own gained knowledge should profane
If I would time expend with such a snipe
But for my sport and profit. I hate the Moor,
And it is thought abroad that ’twixt my sheets
’Has done my office. I know not if ’t be true,
But I, for mere suspicion in that kind,
Will do as if for surety. He holds me well.
The better shall my purpose work on him.
Cassio’s a proper man. Let me see now:
To get his place and to plume up my will
In double knavery—How? how?—Let’s see.
After some time, to abuse Othello’s ear
That he is too familiar with his wife.
He hath a person and a smooth dispose
To be suspected, framed to make women false.
The Moor is of a free and open nature
That thinks men honest that but seem to be so,
And will as tenderly be led by th’ nose
As asses are.
I have ’t. It is engendered. Hell and night
Must bring this monstrous birth to the world’s light.
He exits.
 
 
 

 
 
ACT 2
 
Scene 1
Enter Montano and two Gentlemen.
 
MONTANO
What from the cape can you discern at sea?
FIRST GENTLEMAN
Nothing at all. It is a high-wrought flood.
I cannot ’twixt the heaven and the main
Descry a sail.
MONTANO
Methinks the wind hath spoke aloud at land.
A fuller blast ne’er shook our battlements.
If it hath ruffianed so upon the sea,
What ribs of oak, when mountains melt on them,
Can hold the mortise? What shall we hear of this?
SECOND GENTLEMAN
A segregation of the Turkish fleet.
For do but stand upon the foaming shore,
The chidden billow seems to pelt the clouds,
The wind-shaked surge, with high and monstrous
mane,
Seems to cast water on the burning Bear
And quench the guards of th’ ever-fixèd pole.
I never did like molestation view
On the enchafèd flood.
MONTANO  If that the Turkish fleet
Be not ensheltered and embayed, they are drowned.
It is impossible to bear it out.
 
Enter a third Gentleman.
 
THIRD GENTLEMAN  News, lads! Our wars are done.
The desperate tempest hath so banged the Turks
That their designment halts. A noble ship of Venice
Hath seen a grievous wrack and sufferance
On most part of their fleet.
MONTANO
How? Is this true?
THIRD GENTLEMAN  The ship is here put in,
A Veronesa. Michael Cassio,
Lieutenant to the warlike Moor Othello,
Is come on shore; the Moor himself at sea,
And is in full commission here for Cyprus.
MONTANO
I am glad on ’t. ’Tis a worthy governor.
THIRD GENTLEMAN
But this same Cassio, though he speak of comfort
Touching the Turkish loss, yet he looks sadly
And prays the Moor be safe, for they were parted
With foul and violent tempest.
MONTANO  Pray heaven he be;
For I have served him, and the man commands
Like a full soldier. Let’s to the seaside, ho!
As well to see the vessel that’s come in
As to throw out our eyes for brave Othello,
Even till we make the main and th’ aerial blue
An indistinct regard.
THIRD GENTLEMAN  Come, let’s do so;
For every minute is expectancy
Of more arrivance.
 
Enter Cassio.
 
CASSIO
Thanks, you the valiant of this warlike isle,
That so approve the Moor! O, let the heavens
Give him defense against the elements,
For I have lost him on a dangerous sea.
MONTANO  Is he well shipped?
CASSIO
His bark is stoutly timbered, and his pilot
Of very expert and approved allowance;
Therefore my hopes, not surfeited to death,
Stand in bold cure.
Voices cry within. “A sail, a sail, a sail!"
 
Enter a Messenger.
 
CASSIO  What noise?
MESSENGER
The town is empty; on the brow o’ th’ sea
Stand ranks of people, and they cry “A sail!”
CASSIO
My hopes do shape him for the Governor.
A shot.
SECOND GENTLEMAN
They do discharge their shot of courtesy.
Our friends, at least.
CASSIO  I pray you, sir, go forth,
And give us truth who ’tis that is arrived.
SECOND GENTLEMAN  I shall.                                           	
He exits.
MONTANO
But, good lieutenant, is your general wived?
CASSIO
Most fortunately. He hath achieved a maid
That paragons description and wild fame,
One that excels the quirks of blazoning pens,
And in th’ essential vesture of creation
Does tire the ingener.
 
Enter Second Gentleman.
 
How now? Who has put in?
SECOND GENTLEMAN
’Tis one Iago, ancient to the General.
CASSIO
’Has had most favorable and happy speed!
Tempests themselves, high seas, and howling winds,
The guttered rocks and congregated sands
(Traitors ensteeped to clog the guiltless keel),
As having sense of beauty, do omit
Their mortal natures, letting go safely by
The divine Desdemona.
MONTANO  What is she?
CASSIO
She that I spake of, our great captain’s captain,
Left in the conduct of the bold Iago,
Whose footing here anticipates our thoughts
A sennight’s speed. Great Jove, Othello guard,
And swell his sail with thine own powerful breath,
That he may bless this bay with his tall ship,
Make love’s quick pants in Desdemona’s arms,
Give renewed fire to our extincted spirits,
And bring all Cyprus comfort!
 
Enter Desdemona, Iago, Roderigo, and Emilia.
 
O, behold,
The riches of the ship is come on shore!
You men of Cyprus, let her have your knees.
He kneels.
Hail to thee, lady, and the grace of heaven,
Before, behind thee, and on every hand
Enwheel thee round.                                                             	
He rises.
DESDEMONA  I thank you, valiant Cassio.
What tidings can you tell of my lord?
CASSIO
He is not yet arrived, nor know I aught
But that he’s well and will be shortly here.
DESDEMONA
O, but I fear—How lost you company?
CASSIO
The great contention of sea and skies
Parted our fellowship.
Within “A sail, a sail!” A shot.
But hark, a sail!
SECOND GENTLEMAN
They give their greeting to the citadel.
This likewise is a friend.
CASSIO  See for the news.
Second Gentleman exits.
Good ancient, you are welcome. Welcome, mistress.
He kisses Emilia.
Let it not gall your patience, good Iago,
That I extend my manners. ’Tis my breeding
That gives me this bold show of courtesy.
IAGO
Sir, would she give you so much of her lips
As of her tongue she oft bestows on me,
You would have enough.
DESDEMONA
Alas, she has no speech!
IAGO  In faith, too much.
I find it still when I have list to sleep.
Marry, before your Ladyship, I grant,
She puts her tongue a little in her heart
And chides with thinking.
EMILIA  You have little cause to say so.
IAGO  Come on, come on! You are pictures out of door,
bells in your parlors, wildcats in your kitchens,
saints in your injuries, devils being offended, players
in your huswifery, and huswives in your beds.
DESDEMONA  Oh, fie upon thee, slanderer.
IAGO
Nay, it is true, or else I am a Turk.
You rise to play, and go to bed to work.
EMILIA
You shall not write my praise.
IAGO  No, let me not.
DESDEMONA
What wouldst write of me if thou shouldst praise
me?
IAGO
O, gentle lady, do not put me to ’t,
For I am nothing if not critical.
DESDEMONA
Come on, assay.—There’s one gone to the harbor?
IAGO  Ay, madam.
DESDEMONA, aside
I am not merry, but I do beguile
The thing I am by seeming otherwise.—
Come, how wouldst thou praise me?
IAGO  I am about it, but indeed my invention comes
from my pate as birdlime does from frieze: it
plucks out brains and all. But my muse labors, and
thus she is delivered:
       	If she be fair and wise, fairness and wit,
       	The one’s for use, the other useth it.
DESDEMONA
Well praised! How if she be black and witty?
IAGO
       	If she be black, and thereto have a wit,
       	She’ll find a white that shall her blackness hit.
DESDEMONA
Worse and worse.
EMILIA  How if fair and foolish?
IAGO
       	She never yet was foolish that was fair,
       	For even her folly helped her to an heir.
DESDEMONA  These are old fond paradoxes to make
fools laugh i’ th’ alehouse. What miserable praise
hast thou for her that’s foul and foolish?
IAGO
       	There’s none so foul and foolish thereunto,
       	But does foul pranks which fair and wise ones do.
DESDEMONA  O heavy ignorance! Thou praisest the
worst best. But what praise couldst thou bestow on
a deserving woman indeed, one that in the authority
of her merit did justly put on the vouch of very
malice itself?
IAGO
       	She that was ever fair and never proud,
       	Had tongue at will and yet was never loud,
       	Never lacked gold and yet went never gay,
       	Fled from her wish, and yet said “Now I may,”
       	She that being angered, her revenge being nigh,
       	Bade her wrong stay and her displeasure fly,
       	She that in wisdom never was so frail
       	To change the cod’s head for the salmon’s tail,
       	She that could think and ne’er disclose her mind,
       	See suitors following and not look behind,
       	She was a wight, if ever such wight were—
DESDEMONA  To do what?
IAGO
       	To suckle fools and chronicle small beer.
DESDEMONA  O, most lame and impotent conclusion!
—Do not learn of him, Emilia, though he be thy
husband.—How say you, Cassio? Is he not a most
profane and liberal counselor?
CASSIO  He speaks home, madam. You may relish him
more in the soldier than in the scholar.
Cassio takes Desdemona’s hand.
IAGO, aside  He takes her by the palm. Ay, well said,
whisper. With as little a web as this will I ensnare as
great a fly as Cassio. Ay, smile upon her, do. I will
gyve thee in thine own courtship. You say true, ’tis
so indeed. If such tricks as these strip you out of
your lieutenantry, it had been better you had not
kissed your three fingers so oft, which now again
you are most apt to play the sir in. Very good; well
kissed; an excellent courtesy! ’Tis so, indeed. Yet
again your fingers to your lips? Would they were
clyster pipes for your sake!                                 	
Trumpets within.
The Moor. I know his trumpet.
CASSIO  ’Tis truly so.
DESDEMONA  Let’s meet him and receive him.
CASSIO  Lo, where he comes!
 
Enter Othello and Attendants.
 
OTHELLO
O, my fair warrior!
DESDEMONA  My dear Othello!
OTHELLO
It gives me wonder great as my content
To see you here before me. O my soul’s joy!
If after every tempest come such calms,
May the winds blow till they have wakened death,
And let the laboring bark climb hills of seas
Olympus high, and duck again as low
As hell’s from heaven! If it were now to die,
’Twere now to be most happy, for I fear
My soul hath her content so absolute
That not another comfort like to this
Succeeds in unknown fate.
DESDEMONA  The heavens forbid
But that our loves and comforts should increase
Even as our days do grow!
OTHELLO  Amen to that, sweet powers!
I cannot speak enough of this content.
It stops me here; it is too much of joy.                              	
They kiss.
And this, and this, the greatest discords be
That e’er our hearts shall make!
IAGO, aside  O, you are well tuned now,
But I’ll set down the pegs that make this music,
As honest as I am.
OTHELLO  Come. Let us to the castle.—
News, friends! Our wars are done. The Turks are
drowned.
How does my old acquaintance of this isle?—
Honey, you shall be well desired in Cyprus.
I have found great love amongst them. O, my sweet,
I prattle out of fashion, and I dote
In mine own comforts.—I prithee, good Iago,
Go to the bay and disembark my coffers.
Bring thou the master to the citadel.
He is a good one, and his worthiness
Does challenge much respect.—Come, Desdemona.
Once more, well met at Cyprus.
All but Iago and Roderigo exit.
IAGO, to a departing Attendant  Do thou meet me presently
at the harbor. To Roderigo. Come hither. If
thou be’st valiant—as they say base men being in
love have then a nobility in their natures more than
is native to them—list me. The Lieutenant tonight
watches on the court of guard. First, I must tell thee
this: Desdemona is directly in love with him.
RODERIGO  With him? Why, ’tis not possible.
IAGO  Lay thy finger thus, and let thy soul be instructed.
Mark me with what violence she first loved the
Moor but for bragging and telling her fantastical
lies. And will she love him still for prating? Let not
thy discreet heart think it. Her eye must be fed. And
what delight shall she have to look on the devil?
When the blood is made dull with the act of sport,
there should be, again to inflame it and to give
satiety a fresh appetite, loveliness in favor, sympathy
in years, manners, and beauties, all which the Moor
is defective in. Now, for want of these required
conveniences, her delicate tenderness will find itself
abused, begin to heave the gorge, disrelish and
abhor the Moor. Very nature will instruct her in it
and compel her to some second choice. Now, sir,
this granted—as it is a most pregnant and unforced
position—who stands so eminent in the degree of
this fortune as Cassio does? A knave very voluble, no
further conscionable than in putting on the mere
form of civil and humane seeming for the better
compassing of his salt and most hidden loose
affection. Why, none, why, none! A slipper and
subtle knave, a finder-out of occasions, that has an
eye can stamp and counterfeit advantages, though
true advantage never present itself; a devilish knave!
Besides, the knave is handsome, young, and hath all
those requisites in him that folly and green minds
look after. A pestilent complete knave, and the
woman hath found him already.
RODERIGO  I cannot believe that in her. She’s full of
most blessed condition.
IAGO  Blessed fig’s end! The wine she drinks is made of
grapes. If she had been blessed, she would never
have loved the Moor. Blessed pudding! Didst thou
not see her paddle with the palm of his hand? Didst
not mark that?
RODERIGO  Yes, that I did. But that was but courtesy.
IAGO  Lechery, by this hand! An index and obscure
prologue to the history of lust and foul thoughts.
They met so near with their lips that their breaths
embraced together. Villainous thoughts, Roderigo!
When these mutualities so marshal the way, hard
at hand comes the master and main exercise, th’
incorporate conclusion. Pish! But, sir, be you ruled
by me. I have brought you from Venice. Watch you
tonight. For the command, I’ll lay ’t upon you.
Cassio knows you not. I’ll not be far from you. Do
you find some occasion to anger Cassio, either by
speaking too loud, or tainting his discipline, or from
what other course you please, which the time shall
more favorably minister.
RODERIGO  Well.
IAGO  Sir, he’s rash and very sudden in choler, and
haply may strike at you. Provoke him that he may,
for even out of that will I cause these of Cyprus to
mutiny, whose qualification shall come into no
true taste again but by the displanting of Cassio. So
shall you have a shorter journey to your desires by
the means I shall then have to prefer them, and the
impediment most profitably removed, without the
which there were no expectation of our prosperity.
RODERIGO  I will do this, if you can bring it to any
opportunity.
IAGO  I warrant thee. Meet me by and by at the citadel. I
must fetch his necessaries ashore. Farewell.
RODERIGO  Adieu.                                                                 	
He exits.
IAGO
That Cassio loves her, I do well believe ’t.
That she loves him, ’tis apt and of great credit.
The Moor, howbeit that I endure him not,
Is of a constant, loving, noble nature,
And I dare think he’ll prove to Desdemona
A most dear husband. Now, I do love her too,
Not out of absolute lust (though peradventure
I stand accountant for as great a sin)
But partly led to diet my revenge
For that I do suspect the lusty Moor
Hath leaped into my seat—the thought whereof
Doth, like a poisonous mineral, gnaw my inwards,
And nothing can or shall content my soul
Till I am evened with him, wife for wife,
Or, failing so, yet that I put the Moor
At least into a jealousy so strong
That judgment cannot cure. Which thing to do,
If this poor trash of Venice, whom I trace
For his quick hunting, stand the putting on,
I’ll have our Michael Cassio on the hip,
Abuse him to the Moor in the rank garb
(For I fear Cassio with my nightcap too),
Make the Moor thank me, love me, and reward me
For making him egregiously an ass
And practicing upon his peace and quiet
Even to madness. ’Tis here, but yet confused.
Knavery’s plain face is never seen till used.
He exits.
 
Scene 2
Enter Othello’s Herald with a proclamation.
 
HERALD  It is Othello’s pleasure, our noble and valiant
general, that upon certain tidings now arrived,
importing the mere perdition of the Turkish fleet,
every man put himself into triumph: some to
dance, some to make bonfires, each man to what
sport and revels his addition leads him. For besides
these beneficial news, it is the celebration of his
nuptial. So much was his pleasure should be proclaimed
All offices are open, and there is full
liberty of feasting from this present hour of five till
the bell have told eleven. Heaven bless the isle of
Cyprus and our noble general, Othello!
He exits.
 
Scene 3
Enter Othello, Desdemona, Cassio, and Attendants.
 
OTHELLO
Good Michael, look you to the guard tonight.
Let’s teach ourselves that honorable stop
Not to outsport discretion.
CASSIO
Iago hath direction what to do,
But notwithstanding, with my personal eye
Will I look to ’t.
OTHELLO  Iago is most honest.
Michael, goodnight. Tomorrow with your earliest
Let me have speech with you. To Desdemona. Come,
my dear love,
The purchase made, the fruits are to ensue;
That profit’s yet to come ’tween me and you.—
Goodnight.
Othello and Desdemona exit, with Attendants.
 
Enter Iago.
 
CASSIO
Welcome, Iago. We must to the watch.
IAGO  Not this hour, lieutenant. ’Tis not yet ten o’ th’
clock. Our general cast us thus early for the love of
his Desdemona—who let us not therefore blame;
he hath not yet made wanton the night with her, and
she is sport for Jove.
CASSIO  She’s a most exquisite lady.
IAGO  And, I’ll warrant her, full of game.
CASSIO  Indeed, she’s a most fresh and delicate
creature.
IAGO  What an eye she has! Methinks it sounds a parley
to provocation.
CASSIO  An inviting eye, and yet methinks right
modest.
IAGO  And when she speaks, is it not an alarum to love?
CASSIO  She is indeed perfection.
IAGO  Well, happiness to their sheets! Come, lieutenant,
I have a stoup of wine; and here without are a
brace of Cyprus gallants that would fain have a
measure to the health of black Othello.
CASSIO  Not tonight, good Iago. I have very poor and
unhappy brains for drinking. I could well wish
courtesy would invent some other custom of
entertainment.
IAGO  O, they are our friends! But one cup; I’ll drink
for you.
CASSIO  I have drunk but one cup tonight, and that was
craftily qualified too, and behold what innovation it
makes here. I am unfortunate in the infirmity and
dare not task my weakness with any more.
IAGO  What, man! ’Tis a night of revels. The gallants
desire it.
CASSIO  Where are they?
IAGO  Here at the door. I pray you, call them in.
CASSIO  I’ll do ’t, but it dislikes me.                                     	
He exits.
IAGO
If I can fasten but one cup upon him
With that which he hath drunk tonight already,
He’ll be as full of quarrel and offense
As my young mistress’ dog. Now my sick fool
Roderigo,
Whom love hath turned almost the wrong side out,
To Desdemona hath tonight caroused
Potations pottle-deep; and he’s to watch.
Three else of Cyprus, noble swelling spirits
That hold their honors in a wary distance,
The very elements of this warlike isle,
Have I tonight flustered with flowing cups;
And they watch too. Now, ’mongst this flock of
drunkards
Am I to put our Cassio in some action
That may offend the isle. But here they come.
If consequence do but approve my dream,
My boat sails freely both with wind and stream.
 
Enter Cassio, Montano, and Gentlemen, followed by
Servants with wine.
 
CASSIO  ’Fore God, they have given me a rouse
already.
MONTANO  Good faith, a little one; not past a pint, as I
am a soldier.
IAGO  Some wine, ho!
Sings. And let me the cannikin clink, clink,
       	And let me the cannikin clink.
       	   A soldier’s a man,
       	   O, man’s life’s but a span,
       	Why, then, let a soldier drink.
Some wine, boys!
CASSIO  ’Fore God, an excellent song.
IAGO  I learned it in England, where indeed they are
most potent in potting. Your Dane, your German,
and your swag-bellied Hollander—drink, ho!—are
nothing to your English.
CASSIO  Is your Englishman so exquisite in his
drinking?
IAGO  Why, he drinks you, with facility, your Dane
dead drunk. He sweats not to overthrow your Almain.
He gives your Hollander a vomit ere the next
pottle can be filled.
CASSIO  To the health of our general!
MONTANO  I am for it, lieutenant, and I’ll do you
justice.
IAGO  O sweet England!
Sings. King Stephen was and-a worthy peer,
       	   His breeches cost him but a crown;
       	He held them sixpence all too dear;
       	   With that he called the tailor lown.
       	He was a wight of high renown,
       	   And thou art but of low degree;
       	’Tis pride that pulls the country down,
       	   Then take thy auld cloak about thee.
Some wine, ho!
CASSIO  ’Fore God, this is a more exquisite song than
the other!
IAGO  Will you hear ’t again?
CASSIO  No, for I hold him to be unworthy of his place
that does those things. Well, God’s above all; and
there be souls must be saved, and there be souls
must not be saved.
IAGO  It’s true, good lieutenant.
CASSIO  For mine own part—no offense to the General,
nor any man of quality—I hope to be saved.
IAGO  And so do I too, lieutenant.
CASSIO  Ay, but, by your leave, not before me. The
Lieutenant is to be saved before the Ancient. Let’s
have no more of this. Let’s to our affairs. God
forgive us our sins! Gentlemen, let’s look to our
business. Do not think, gentlemen, I am drunk. This
is my ancient, this is my right hand, and this is my
left. I am not drunk now. I can stand well enough,
and I speak well enough.
GENTLEMEN  Excellent well.
CASSIO  Why, very well then. You must not think then
that I am drunk.                                                                  	
He exits.
MONTANO
To th’ platform, masters. Come, let’s set the watch.
Gentlemen exit.
IAGO, to Montano
You see this fellow that is gone before?
He’s a soldier fit to stand by Caesar
And give direction; and do but see his vice.
’Tis to his virtue a just equinox,
The one as long as th’ other. ’Tis pity of him.
I fear the trust Othello puts him in,
On some odd time of his infirmity,
Will shake this island.
MONTANO  But is he often thus?
IAGO
’Tis evermore the prologue to his sleep.
He’ll watch the horologe a double set
If drink rock not his cradle.
MONTANO  It were well
The General were put in mind of it.
Perhaps he sees it not, or his good nature
Prizes the virtue that appears in Cassio
And looks not on his evils. Is not this true?
 
Enter Roderigo.
 
IAGO, aside to Roderigo  How now, Roderigo?
I pray you, after the Lieutenant, go.
Roderigo exits.
MONTANO
And ’tis great pity that the noble Moor
Should hazard such a place as his own second
With one of an engraffed infirmity.
It were an honest action to say so
To the Moor.
IAGO  Not I, for this fair island.
I do love Cassio well and would do much
To cure him of this evil—                              	
“Help, help!” within.
But hark! What noise?
 
Enter Cassio, pursuing Roderigo.
 
CASSIO  Zounds, you rogue, you rascal!
MONTANO  What’s the matter, lieutenant?
CASSIO  A knave teach me my duty? I’ll beat the knave
into a twiggen bottle.
RODERIGO  Beat me?
CASSIO  Dost thou prate, rogue?                             	
He hits Roderigo.
MONTANO  Nay, good lieutenant. I pray you, sir, hold
your hand.
CASSIO  Let me go, sir, or I’ll knock you o’er the
mazard.
MONTANO  Come, come, you’re drunk.
CASSIO  Drunk?
They fight.
IAGO, aside to Roderigo
Away, I say! Go out and cry a mutiny.
Roderigo exits.
Nay, good lieutenant.—God’s will, gentlemen!—
Help, ho! Lieutenant—sir—Montano—sir—
Help, masters!—Here’s a goodly watch indeed!
A bell is rung.
Who’s that which rings the bell? Diablo, ho!
The town will rise. God’s will, lieutenant, hold!
You will be shamed forever.
 
Enter Othello and Attendants.
 
OTHELLO
What is the matter here?
MONTANO  Zounds, I bleed
still.
I am hurt to th’ death. He dies!                           	
He attacks Cassio.
OTHELLO  Hold, for your lives!
IAGO
Hold, ho! Lieutenant—sir—Montano—
gentlemen—
Have you forgot all sense of place and duty?
Hold! The General speaks to you. Hold, for shame!
OTHELLO
Why, how now, ho! From whence ariseth this?
Are we turned Turks, and to ourselves do that
Which heaven hath forbid the Ottomites?
For Christian shame, put by this barbarous brawl!
He that stirs next to carve for his own rage
Holds his soul light; he dies upon his motion.
Silence that dreadful bell. It frights the isle
From her propriety. What is the matter, masters?
Honest Iago, that looks dead with grieving,
Speak. Who began this? On thy love, I charge thee.
IAGO
I do not know. Friends all but now, even now,
In quarter and in terms like bride and groom
Divesting them for bed; and then but now,
As if some planet had unwitted men,
Swords out, and tilting one at other’s breast,
In opposition bloody. I cannot speak
Any beginning to this peevish odds,
And would in action glorious I had lost
Those legs that brought me to a part of it!
OTHELLO
How comes it, Michael, you are thus forgot?
CASSIO
I pray you pardon me; I cannot speak.
OTHELLO
Worthy Montano, you were wont be civil.
The gravity and stillness of your youth
The world hath noted. And your name is great
In mouths of wisest censure. What’s the matter
That you unlace your reputation thus,
And spend your rich opinion for the name
Of a night-brawler? Give me answer to it.
MONTANO
Worthy Othello, I am hurt to danger.
Your officer Iago can inform you,
While I spare speech, which something now offends
me,
Of all that I do know; nor know I aught
By me that’s said or done amiss this night,
Unless self-charity be sometimes a vice,
And to defend ourselves it be a sin
When violence assails us.
OTHELLO  Now, by heaven,
My blood begins my safer guides to rule,
And passion, having my best judgment collied,
Assays to lead the way. Zounds, if I stir,
Or do but lift this arm, the best of you
Shall sink in my rebuke. Give me to know
How this foul rout began, who set it on;
And he that is approved in this offense,
Though he had twinned with me, both at a birth,
Shall lose me. What, in a town of war
Yet wild, the people’s hearts brimful of fear,
To manage private and domestic quarrel,
In night, and on the court and guard of safety?
’Tis monstrous. Iago, who began ’t?
MONTANO
If partially affined, or leagued in office,
Thou dost deliver more or less than truth,
Thou art no soldier.
IAGO  Touch me not so near.
I had rather have this tongue cut from my mouth
Than it should do offense to Michael Cassio.
Yet I persuade myself, to speak the truth
Shall nothing wrong him. Thus it is, general:
Montano and myself being in speech,
There comes a fellow crying out for help,
And Cassio following him with determined sword
To execute upon him. Sir, this gentleman
Pointing to Montano.
Steps in to Cassio and entreats his pause.
Myself the crying fellow did pursue,
Lest by his clamor—as it so fell out—
The town might fall in fright. He, swift of foot,
Outran my purpose, and I returned the rather
For that I heard the clink and fall of swords
And Cassio high in oath, which till tonight
I ne’er might say before. When I came back—
For this was brief—I found them close together
At blow and thrust, even as again they were
When you yourself did part them.
More of this matter cannot I report.
But men are men; the best sometimes forget.
Though Cassio did some little wrong to him,
As men in rage strike those that wish them best,
Yet surely Cassio, I believe, received
From him that fled some strange indignity
Which patience could not pass.
OTHELLO  I know, Iago,
Thy honesty and love doth mince this matter,
Making it light to Cassio.—Cassio, I love thee,
But nevermore be officer of mine.
 
Enter Desdemona attended.
 
Look if my gentle love be not raised up!
I’ll make thee an example.
DESDEMONA
What is the matter, dear?
OTHELLO  All’s well now,
sweeting.
Come away to bed. To Montano. Sir, for your hurts,
Myself will be your surgeon.—Lead him off.
Montano is led off.
Iago, look with care about the town
And silence those whom this vile brawl
distracted.—
Come, Desdemona. ’Tis the soldier’s life
To have their balmy slumbers waked with strife.
All but Iago and Cassio exit.
IAGO  What, are you hurt, lieutenant?
CASSIO  Ay, past all surgery.
IAGO  Marry, God forbid!
CASSIO  Reputation, reputation, reputation! O, I have
lost my reputation! I have lost the immortal part of
myself, and what remains is bestial. My reputation,
Iago, my reputation!
IAGO  As I am an honest man, I thought you had
received some bodily wound. There is more sense
in that than in reputation. Reputation is an idle and
most false imposition, oft got without merit and lost
without deserving. You have lost no reputation at
all, unless you repute yourself such a loser. What,
man, there are ways to recover the General again!
You are but now cast in his mood—a punishment
more in policy than in malice, even so as one would
beat his offenseless dog to affright an imperious
lion. Sue to him again and he’s yours.
CASSIO  I will rather sue to be despised than to deceive
so good a commander with so slight, so drunken,
and so indiscreet an officer. Drunk? And speak
parrot? And squabble? Swagger? Swear? And discourse
fustian with one’s own shadow? O thou
invisible spirit of wine, if thou hast no name to be
known by, let us call thee devil!
IAGO  What was he that you followed with your sword?
What had he done to you?
CASSIO  I know not.
IAGO  Is ’t possible?
CASSIO  I remember a mass of things, but nothing
distinctly; a quarrel, but nothing wherefore. O
God, that men should put an enemy in their
mouths to steal away their brains! That we should
with joy, pleasance, revel, and applause transform
ourselves into beasts!
IAGO  Why, but you are now well enough. How came
you thus recovered?
CASSIO  It hath pleased the devil drunkenness to give
place to the devil wrath. One unperfectness shows
me another, to make me frankly despise myself.
IAGO  Come, you are too severe a moraler. As the time,
the place, and the condition of this country stands,
I could heartily wish this had not so befallen. But
since it is as it is, mend it for your own good.
CASSIO  I will ask him for my place again; he shall tell
me I am a drunkard! Had I as many mouths as
Hydra, such an answer would stop them all. To be
now a sensible man, by and by a fool, and presently
a beast! O, strange! Every inordinate cup is unblessed,
and the ingredient is a devil.
IAGO  Come, come, good wine is a good familiar creature,
if it be well used. Exclaim no more against it.
And, good lieutenant, I think you think I love you.
CASSIO  I have well approved it, sir.—I drunk!
IAGO  You or any man living may be drunk at a time,
man. I’ll tell you what you shall do. Our general’s
wife is now the general: I may say so in this
respect, for that he hath devoted and given up
himself to the contemplation, mark, and denotement
of her parts and graces. Confess yourself
freely to her. Importune her help to put you in your
place again. She is of so free, so kind, so apt, so
blessed a disposition she holds it a vice in her
goodness not to do more than she is requested. This
broken joint between you and her husband entreat
her to splinter, and, my fortunes against any lay
worth naming, this crack of your love shall grow
stronger than it was before.
CASSIO  You advise me well.
IAGO  I protest, in the sincerity of love and honest
kindness.
CASSIO  I think it freely; and betimes in the morning I
will beseech the virtuous Desdemona to undertake
for me. I am desperate of my fortunes if they check
me here.
IAGO  You are in the right. Good night, lieutenant. I
must to the watch.
CASSIO  Good night, honest Iago.                                   	
Cassio exits.
IAGO
And what’s he, then, that says I play the villain,
When this advice is free I give and honest,
Probal to thinking, and indeed the course
To win the Moor again? For ’tis most easy
Th’ inclining Desdemona to subdue
In any honest suit. She’s framed as fruitful
As the free elements. And then for her
To win the Moor—were ’t to renounce his baptism,
All seals and symbols of redeemèd sin—
His soul is so enfettered to her love
That she may make, unmake, do what she list,
Even as her appetite shall play the god
With his weak function. How am I then a villain
To counsel Cassio to this parallel course
Directly to his good? Divinity of hell!
When devils will the blackest sins put on,
They do suggest at first with heavenly shows,
As I do now. For whiles this honest fool
Plies Desdemona to repair his fortune,
And she for him pleads strongly to the Moor,
I’ll pour this pestilence into his ear:
That she repeals him for her body’s lust;
And by how much she strives to do him good,
She shall undo her credit with the Moor.
So will I turn her virtue into pitch,
And out of her own goodness make the net
That shall enmesh them all.
 
Enter Roderigo.
 
How now, Roderigo?
RODERIGO  I do follow here in the chase, not like a
hound that hunts, but one that fills up the cry. My
money is almost spent, I have been tonight exceedingly
well cudgeled, and I think the issue will be I
shall have so much experience for my pains, and so,
with no money at all and a little more wit, return
again to Venice.
IAGO
How poor are they that have not patience!
What wound did ever heal but by degrees?
Thou know’st we work by wit and not by witchcraft,
And wit depends on dilatory time.
Dost not go well? Cassio hath beaten thee,
And thou, by that small hurt, hast cashiered Cassio.
Though other things grow fair against the sun,
Yet fruits that blossom first will first be ripe.
Content thyself awhile. By th’ Mass, ’tis morning!
Pleasure and action make the hours seem short.
Retire thee; go where thou art billeted.
Away, I say! Thou shalt know more hereafter.
Nay, get thee gone.                                                    	
Roderigo exits.
Two things are to be done.
My wife must move for Cassio to her mistress.
I’ll set her on.
Myself the while to draw the Moor apart
And bring him jump when he may Cassio find
Soliciting his wife. Ay, that’s the way.
Dull not device by coldness and delay.
He exits.
 
 
 

 
 
ACT 3
 
Scene 1
Enter Cassio with Musicians.
 
CASSIO
Masters, play here (I will content your pains)
Something that’s brief; and bid “Good morrow,
general.”                                                                           	
They play.
 
Enter the Clown.
 
CLOWN  Why masters, have your instruments been in
Naples, that they speak i’ th’ nose thus?
MUSICIAN  How, sir, how?
CLOWN  Are these, I pray you, wind instruments?
MUSICIAN  Ay, marry, are they, sir.
CLOWN  O, thereby hangs a tail.
MUSICIAN  Whereby hangs a tale, sir?
CLOWN  Marry, sir, by many a wind instrument that I
know. But, masters, here’s money for you; and the
General so likes your music that he desires you, for
love’s sake, to make no more noise with it.
MUSICIAN  Well, sir, we will not.
CLOWN  If you have any music that may not be heard, to
’t again. But, as they say, to hear music the General
does not greatly care.
MUSICIAN  We have none such, sir.
CLOWN  Then put up your pipes in your bag, for I’ll
away. Go, vanish into air, away!
 
Musicians exit.
CASSIO  Dost thou hear, mine honest friend?
CLOWN  No, I hear not your honest friend. I hear you.
CASSIO  Prithee, keep up thy quillets.                         	
Giving money.
There’s a poor piece of gold for thee. If the gentlewoman
that attends the General’s wife be stirring,
tell her there’s one Cassio entreats her a little favor
of speech. Wilt thou do this?
CLOWN  She is stirring, sir. If she will stir hither, I shall
seem to notify unto her.
CASSIO
Do, good my friend.                                                       	
Clown exits.
 
Enter Iago.
 
In happy time, Iago.
IAGO  You have not been abed, then?
CASSIO  Why, no. The day had broke
Before we parted. I have made bold, Iago,
To send in to your wife. My suit to her
Is that she will to virtuous Desdemona
Procure me some access.
IAGO  I’ll send her to you presently,
And I’ll devise a mean to draw the Moor
Out of the way, that your converse and business
May be more free.
CASSIO
I humbly thank you for ’t. Iago exits. I never
knew
A Florentine more kind and honest.
 
Enter Emilia.
 
EMILIA
Good morrow, good lieutenant. I am sorry
For your displeasure, but all will sure be well.
The General and his wife are talking of it,
And she speaks for you stoutly. The Moor replies
That he you hurt is of great fame in Cyprus
And great affinity, and that in wholesome wisdom
He might not but refuse you. But he protests he
loves you
And needs no other suitor but his likings
To take the safest occasion by the front
To bring you in again.
CASSIO  Yet I beseech you,
If you think fit, or that it may be done,
Give me advantage of some brief discourse
With Desdemon alone.
EMILIA  Pray you come in.
I will bestow you where you shall have time
To speak your bosom freely.
CASSIO  I am much bound to you.
They exit.
 
Scene 2
Enter Othello, Iago, and Gentlemen.
 
OTHELLO
These letters give, Iago, to the pilot
And by him do my duties to the Senate.
He gives Iago some papers.
That done, I will be walking on the works.
Repair there to me.
IAGO  Well, my good lord, I’ll do ’t.
OTHELLO
This fortification, gentlemen, shall we see ’t?
GENTLEMEN
We wait upon your Lordship.
They exit.
 
Scene 3
Enter Desdemona, Cassio, and Emilia.
 
DESDEMONA
Be thou assured, good Cassio, I will do
All my abilities in thy behalf.
EMILIA
Good madam, do. I warrant it grieves my husband
As if the cause were his.
DESDEMONA
O, that’s an honest fellow! Do not doubt, Cassio,
But I will have my lord and you again
As friendly as you were.
CASSIO  Bounteous madam,
Whatever shall become of Michael Cassio,
He’s never anything but your true servant.
DESDEMONA
I know ’t. I thank you. You do love my lord;
You have known him long; and be you well assured
He shall in strangeness stand no farther off
Than in a politic distance.
CASSIO  Ay, but, lady,
That policy may either last so long,
Or feed upon such nice and waterish diet,
Or breed itself so out of circumstance,
That, I being absent and my place supplied,
My general will forget my love and service.
DESDEMONA
Do not doubt that. Before Emilia here,
I give thee warrant of thy place. Assure thee,
If I do vow a friendship, I’ll perform it
To the last article. My lord shall never rest:
I’ll watch him tame and talk him out of patience;
His bed shall seem a school, his board a shrift;
I’ll intermingle everything he does
With Cassio’s suit. Therefore be merry, Cassio,
For thy solicitor shall rather die
Than give thy cause away.
 
Enter Othello and Iago.
 
EMILIA  Madam, here comes my lord.
CASSIO  Madam, I’ll take my leave.
DESDEMONA  Why, stay, and hear me speak.
CASSIO
Madam, not now. I am very ill at ease,
Unfit for mine own purposes.
DESDEMONA  Well, do your discretion.                       	
Cassio exits.
IAGO
Ha, I like not that.
OTHELLO  What dost thou say?
IAGO
Nothing, my lord; or if—I know not what.
OTHELLO
Was not that Cassio parted from my wife?
IAGO
Cassio, my lord? No, sure, I cannot think it
That he would steal away so guiltylike,
Seeing your coming.
OTHELLO  I do believe ’twas he.
DESDEMONA  How now, my lord?
I have been talking with a suitor here,
A man that languishes in your displeasure.
OTHELLO  Who is ’t you mean?
DESDEMONA
Why, your lieutenant, Cassio. Good my lord,
If I have any grace or power to move you,
His present reconciliation take;
For if he be not one that truly loves you,
That errs in ignorance and not in cunning,
I have no judgment in an honest face.
I prithee call him back.
OTHELLO  Went he hence now?
DESDEMONA  Yes, faith, so humbled
That he hath left part of his grief with me
To suffer with him. Good love, call him back.
OTHELLO
Not now, sweet Desdemon. Some other time.
DESDEMONA
But shall ’t be shortly?
OTHELLO  The sooner, sweet, for you.
DESDEMONA
Shall ’t be tonight at supper?
OTHELLO  No, not tonight.
DESDEMONA  Tomorrow dinner, then?
OTHELLO  I shall not dine at home;
I meet the captains at the citadel.
DESDEMONA
Why then tomorrow night, or Tuesday morn,
On Tuesday noon or night; on Wednesday morn.
I prithee name the time, but let it not
Exceed three days. In faith, he’s penitent;
And yet his trespass, in our common reason—
Save that, they say, the wars must make example
Out of her best—is not almost a fault
T’ incur a private check. When shall he come?
Tell me, Othello. I wonder in my soul
What you would ask me that I should deny,
Or stand so mamm’ring on? What? Michael Cassio,
That came a-wooing with you, and so many a time,
When I have spoke of you dispraisingly,
Hath ta’en your part—to have so much to do
To bring him in! By ’r Lady, I could do much—
OTHELLO
Prithee, no more. Let him come when he will;
I will deny thee nothing.
DESDEMONA  Why, this is not a boon!
’Tis as I should entreat you wear your gloves,
Or feed on nourishing dishes, or keep you warm,
Or sue to you to do a peculiar profit
To your own person. Nay, when I have a suit
Wherein I mean to touch your love indeed,
It shall be full of poise and difficult weight,
And fearful to be granted.
OTHELLO  I will deny thee nothing!
Whereon, I do beseech thee, grant me this,
To leave me but a little to myself.
DESDEMONA
Shall I deny you? No. Farewell, my lord.
OTHELLO
Farewell, my Desdemona. I’ll come to thee straight.
DESDEMONA
Emilia, come.—Be as your fancies teach you.
Whate’er you be, I am obedient.
Desdemona and Emilia exit.
OTHELLO
Excellent wretch! Perdition catch my soul
But I do love thee! And when I love thee not,
Chaos is come again.
IAGO  My noble lord—
OTHELLO
What dost thou say, Iago?
IAGO  Did Michael Cassio,
When you wooed my lady, know of your love?
OTHELLO
He did, from first to last. Why dost thou ask?
IAGO
But for a satisfaction of my thought,
No further harm.
OTHELLO  Why of thy thought, Iago?
IAGO
I did not think he had been acquainted with her.
OTHELLO
O yes, and went between us very oft.
IAGO  Indeed?
OTHELLO
Indeed? Ay, indeed! Discern’st thou aught in that?
Is he not honest?
IAGO  Honest, my lord?
OTHELLO  Honest—ay, honest.
IAGO
My lord, for aught I know.
OTHELLO  What dost thou think?
IAGO  Think, my lord?
OTHELLO
“Think, my lord?” By heaven, thou echo’st me
As if there were some monster in thy thought
Too hideous to be shown. Thou dost mean
something.
I heard thee say even now, thou lik’st not that,
When Cassio left my wife. What didst not like?
And when I told thee he was of my counsel
In my whole course of wooing, thou cried’st
“Indeed?”
And didst contract and purse thy brow together
As if thou then hadst shut up in thy brain
Some horrible conceit. If thou dost love me,
Show me thy thought.
IAGO  My lord, you know I love you.
OTHELLO  I think thou dost;
And for I know thou ’rt full of love and honesty
And weigh’st thy words before thou giv’st them
breath,
Therefore these stops of thine fright me the more.
For such things in a false, disloyal knave
Are tricks of custom; but in a man that’s just,
They’re close dilations working from the heart
That passion cannot rule.
IAGO  For Michael Cassio,
I dare be sworn I think that he is honest.
OTHELLO
I think so too.
IAGO  Men should be what they seem;
Or those that be not, would they might seem none!
OTHELLO  Certain, men should be what they seem.
IAGO
Why then, I think Cassio’s an honest man.
OTHELLO  Nay, yet there’s more in this.
I prithee speak to me as to thy thinkings,
As thou dost ruminate, and give thy worst of
thoughts
The worst of words.
IAGO  Good my lord, pardon me.
Though I am bound to every act of duty,
I am not bound to that all slaves are free to.
Utter my thoughts? Why, say they are vile and
false—
As where’s that palace whereinto foul things
Sometimes intrude not? Who has that breast so
pure
But some uncleanly apprehensions
Keep leets and law days and in sessions sit
With meditations lawful?
OTHELLO
Thou dost conspire against thy friend, Iago,
If thou but think’st him wronged and mak’st his ear
A stranger to thy thoughts.
IAGO  I do beseech you,
Though I perchance am vicious in my guess—
As, I confess, it is my nature’s plague
To spy into abuses, and oft my jealousy
Shapes faults that are not—that your wisdom
From one that so imperfectly conceits
Would take no notice, nor build yourself a trouble
Out of his scattering and unsure observance.
It were not for your quiet nor your good,
Nor for my manhood, honesty, and wisdom,
To let you know my thoughts.
OTHELLO  What dost thou mean?
IAGO
Good name in man and woman, dear my lord,
Is the immediate jewel of their souls.
Who steals my purse steals trash. ’Tis something,
nothing;
’Twas mine, ’tis his, and has been slave to
thousands.
But he that filches from me my good name
Robs me of that which not enriches him
And makes me poor indeed.
OTHELLO  By heaven, I’ll know thy thoughts.
IAGO
You cannot, if my heart were in your hand,
Nor shall not, whilst ’tis in my custody.
OTHELLO
Ha?
IAGO  O, beware, my lord, of jealousy!
It is the green-eyed monster which doth mock
The meat it feeds on. That cuckold lives in bliss
Who, certain of his fate, loves not his wronger;
But O, what damnèd minutes tells he o’er
Who dotes, yet doubts; suspects, yet strongly loves!
OTHELLO  O misery!
IAGO
Poor and content is rich, and rich enough;
But riches fineless is as poor as winter
To him that ever fears he shall be poor.
Good God, the souls of all my tribe defend
From jealousy!
OTHELLO  Why, why is this?
Think’st thou I’d make a life of jealousy,
To follow still the changes of the moon
With fresh suspicions? No. To be once in doubt
Is once to be resolved. Exchange me for a goat
When I shall turn the business of my soul
To such exsufflicate and blown surmises,
Matching thy inference. ’Tis not to make me jealous
To say my wife is fair, feeds well, loves company,
Is free of speech, sings, plays, and dances well.
Where virtue is, these are more virtuous.
Nor from mine own weak merits will I draw
The smallest fear or doubt of her revolt,
For she had eyes, and chose me. No, Iago,
I’ll see before I doubt; when I doubt, prove;
And on the proof, there is no more but this:
Away at once with love or jealousy.
IAGO
I am glad of this, for now I shall have reason
To show the love and duty that I bear you
With franker spirit. Therefore, as I am bound,
Receive it from me. I speak not yet of proof.
Look to your wife; observe her well with Cassio;
Wear your eyes thus, not jealous nor secure.
I would not have your free and noble nature,
Out of self-bounty, be abused. Look to ’t.
I know our country disposition well.
In Venice they do let God see the pranks
They dare not show their husbands. Their best
conscience
Is not to leave ’t undone, but keep ’t unknown.
OTHELLO  Dost thou say so?
IAGO
She did deceive her father, marrying you,
And when she seemed to shake and fear your looks,
She loved them most.
OTHELLO  And so she did.
IAGO  Why, go to, then!
She that, so young, could give out such a seeming,
To seel her father’s eyes up close as oak,
He thought ’twas witchcraft! But I am much to
blame.
I humbly do beseech you of your pardon
For too much loving you.
OTHELLO  I am bound to thee forever.
IAGO
I see this hath a little dashed your spirits.
OTHELLO
Not a jot, not a jot.
IAGO  I’ faith, I fear it has.
I hope you will consider what is spoke
Comes from my love. But I do see you’re moved.
I am to pray you not to strain my speech
To grosser issues nor to larger reach
Than to suspicion.
OTHELLO  I will not.
IAGO  Should you do so, my lord,
My speech should fall into such vile success
As my thoughts aim not at. Cassio’s my worthy
friend.
My lord, I see you’re moved.
OTHELLO  No, not much moved.
I do not think but Desdemona’s honest.
IAGO
Long live she so! And long live you to think so!
OTHELLO
And yet, how nature erring from itself—
IAGO
Ay, there’s the point. As, to be bold with you,
Not to affect many proposèd matches
Of her own clime, complexion, and degree,
Whereto we see in all things nature tends—
Foh! One may smell in such a will most rank,
Foul disproportion, thoughts unnatural—
But pardon me—I do not in position
Distinctly speak of her, though I may fear
Her will, recoiling to her better judgment,
May fall to match you with her country forms
And happily repent.
OTHELLO  Farewell, farewell!
If more thou dost perceive, let me know more.
Set on thy wife to observe. Leave me, Iago.
IAGO, beginning to exit  My lord, I take my leave.
OTHELLO
Why did I marry? This honest creature doubtless
Sees and knows more, much more, than he unfolds.
IAGO, returning
My lord, I would I might entreat your Honor
To scan this thing no farther. Leave it to time.
Although ’tis fit that Cassio have his place—
For sure he fills it up with great ability—
Yet, if you please to hold him off awhile,
You shall by that perceive him and his means.
Note if your lady strain his entertainment
With any strong or vehement importunity.
Much will be seen in that. In the meantime,
Let me be thought too busy in my fears—
As worthy cause I have to fear I am—
And hold her free, I do beseech your Honor.
OTHELLO  Fear not my government.
IAGO  I once more take my leave.                                          	
He exits.
OTHELLO
This fellow’s of exceeding honesty,
And knows all qualities with a learnèd spirit
Of human dealings. If I do prove her haggard,
Though that her jesses were my dear heartstrings,
I’d whistle her off and let her down the wind
To prey at fortune. Haply, for I am black
And have not those soft parts of conversation
That chamberers have, or for I am declined
Into the vale of years—yet that’s not much—
She’s gone, I am abused, and my relief
Must be to loathe her. O curse of marriage,
That we can call these delicate creatures ours
And not their appetites! I had rather be a toad
And live upon the vapor of a dungeon
Than keep a corner in the thing I love
For others’ uses. Yet ’tis the plague of great ones;
Prerogatived are they less than the base.
’Tis destiny unshunnable, like death.
Even then this forkèd plague is fated to us
When we do quicken. Look where she comes.
 
Enter Desdemona and Emilia.
 
If she be false, heaven mocks itself!
I’ll not believe ’t.
DESDEMONA  How now, my dear Othello?
Your dinner, and the generous islanders
By you invited, do attend your presence.
OTHELLO  I am to blame.
DESDEMONA
Why do you speak so faintly? Are you not well?
OTHELLO
I have a pain upon my forehead, here.
DESDEMONA
Faith, that’s with watching. ’Twill away again.
Let me but bind it hard; within this hour
It will be well.
OTHELLO  Your napkin is too little.
Let it alone.                                 	
The handkerchief falls, unnoticed.
Come, I’ll go in with you.
DESDEMONA
I am very sorry that you are not well.
Othello and Desdemona exit.
EMILIA, picking up the handkerchief
I am glad I have found this napkin.
This was her first remembrance from the Moor.
My wayward husband hath a hundred times
Wooed me to steal it. But she so loves the token
(For he conjured her she should ever keep it)
That she reserves it evermore about her
To kiss and talk to. I’ll have the work ta’en out
And give ’t Iago. What he will do with it
Heaven knows, not I.
I nothing but to please his fantasy.
 
Enter Iago.
 
IAGO  How now? What do you here alone?
EMILIA
Do not you chide. I have a thing for you.
IAGO
You have a thing for me? It is a common thing—
EMILIA  Ha?
IAGO  To have a foolish wife.
EMILIA
O, is that all? What will you give me now
For that same handkerchief?
IAGO  What handkerchief?
EMILIA  What handkerchief?
Why, that the Moor first gave to Desdemona,
That which so often you did bid me steal.
IAGO  Hast stol’n it from her?
EMILIA
No, faith, she let it drop by negligence,
And to th’ advantage I, being here, took ’t up.
Look, here ’tis.
IAGO  A good wench! Give it me.
EMILIA
What will you do with ’t, that you have been so
earnest
To have me filch it?
IAGO, snatching it  Why, what is that to you?
EMILIA
If it be not for some purpose of import,
Give ’t me again. Poor lady, she’ll run mad
When she shall lack it.
IAGO  Be not acknown on ’t.
I have use for it. Go, leave me.                                      	
Emilia exits.
I will in Cassio’s lodging lose this napkin
And let him find it. Trifles light as air
Are to the jealous confirmations strong
As proofs of holy writ. This may do something.
The Moor already changes with my poison;
Dangerous conceits are in their natures poisons,
Which at the first are scarce found to distaste,
But with a little act upon the blood
Burn like the mines of sulfur.
 
Enter Othello.
 
I did say so.
Look where he comes. Not poppy nor mandragora
Nor all the drowsy syrups of the world
Shall ever medicine thee to that sweet sleep
Which thou owedst yesterday.
OTHELLO  Ha, ha, false to me?
IAGO
Why, how now, general? No more of that!
OTHELLO
Avaunt! Begone! Thou hast set me on the rack.
I swear ’tis better to be much abused
Than but to know ’t a little.
IAGO  How now, my lord?
OTHELLO
What sense had I of her stol’n hours of lust?
I saw ’t not, thought it not; it harmed not me.
I slept the next night well, fed well, was free and
merry.
I found not Cassio’s kisses on her lips.
He that is robbed, not wanting what is stol’n,
Let him not know ’t, and he’s not robbed at all.
IAGO  I am sorry to hear this.
OTHELLO
I had been happy if the general camp,
Pioners and all, had tasted her sweet body,
So I had nothing known. O, now, forever
Farewell the tranquil mind! Farewell content!
Farewell the plumèd troops and the big wars
That makes ambition virtue! O, farewell!
Farewell the neighing steed and the shrill trump,
The spirit-stirring drum, th’ ear-piercing fife,
The royal banner, and all quality,
Pride, pomp, and circumstance of glorious war!
And O you mortal engines, whose rude throats
Th’ immortal Jove’s dread clamors counterfeit,
Farewell! Othello’s occupation’s gone!
IAGO  Is ’t possible, my lord?
OTHELLO
Villain, be sure thou prove my love a whore!
Be sure of it. Give me the ocular proof,
Or, by the worth of mine eternal soul,
Thou hadst been better have been born a dog
Than answer my waked wrath.
IAGO  Is ’t come to this?
OTHELLO
Make me to see ’t, or at the least so prove it
That the probation bear no hinge nor loop
To hang a doubt on, or woe upon thy life!
IAGO  My noble lord—
OTHELLO
If thou dost slander her and torture me,
Never pray more. Abandon all remorse;
On horror’s head horrors accumulate;
Do deeds to make heaven weep, all Earth amazed;
For nothing canst thou to damnation add
Greater than that.
IAGO  O grace! O heaven forgive me!
Are you a man? Have you a soul or sense?
God b’ wi’ you. Take mine office.—O wretched fool,
That liv’st to make thine honesty a vice!—
O monstrous world! Take note, take note, O world:
To be direct and honest is not safe.—
I thank you for this profit, and from hence
I’ll love no friend, sith love breeds such offense.
OTHELLO  Nay, stay. Thou shouldst be honest.
IAGO
I should be wise; for honesty’s a fool
And loses that it works for.
OTHELLO  By the world,
I think my wife be honest and think she is not.
I think that thou art just and think thou art not.
I’ll have some proof! Her name, that was as fresh
As Dian’s visage, is now begrimed and black
As mine own face. If there be cords, or knives,
Poison, or fire, or suffocating streams,
I’ll not endure it. Would I were satisfied!
IAGO
I see you are eaten up with passion.
I do repent me that I put it to you.
You would be satisfied?
OTHELLO  Would? Nay, and I will.
IAGO
And may; but how? How satisfied, my lord?
Would you, the supervisor, grossly gape on,
Behold her topped?
OTHELLO  Death and damnation! O!
IAGO
It were a tedious difficulty, I think,
To bring them to that prospect. Damn them then
If ever mortal eyes do see them bolster
More than their own! What then? How then?
What shall I say? Where’s satisfaction?
It is impossible you should see this,
Were they as prime as goats, as hot as monkeys,
As salt as wolves in pride, and fools as gross
As ignorance made drunk. But yet I say,
If imputation and strong circumstances
Which lead directly to the door of truth
Will give you satisfaction, you might have ’t.
OTHELLO
Give me a living reason she’s disloyal.
IAGO  I do not like the office,
But sith I am entered in this cause so far,
Pricked to ’t by foolish honesty and love,
I will go on. I lay with Cassio lately,
And being troubled with a raging tooth
I could not sleep. There are a kind of men
So loose of soul that in their sleeps will mutter
Their affairs. One of this kind is Cassio.
In sleep I heard him say “Sweet Desdemona,
Let us be wary, let us hide our loves.”
And then, sir, would he gripe and wring my hand,
Cry “O sweet creature!” then kiss me hard,
As if he plucked up kisses by the roots
That grew upon my lips; then laid his leg
O’er my thigh, and sighed, and kissed, and then
Cried “Cursèd fate that gave thee to the Moor!”
OTHELLO
O monstrous! Monstrous!
IAGO  Nay, this was but his
dream.
OTHELLO
But this denoted a foregone conclusion.
’Tis a shrewd doubt, though it be but a dream.
IAGO
And this may help to thicken other proofs
That do demonstrate thinly.
OTHELLO  I’ll tear her all to pieces.
IAGO
Nay, but be wise. Yet we see nothing done.
She may be honest yet. Tell me but this:
Have you not sometimes seen a handkerchief
Spotted with strawberries in your wife’s hand?
OTHELLO
I gave her such a one. ’Twas my first gift.
IAGO
I know not that; but such a handkerchief—
I am sure it was your wife’s—did I today
See Cassio wipe his beard with.
OTHELLO  If it be that—
IAGO
If it be that, or any that was hers,
It speaks against her with the other proofs.
OTHELLO
O, that the slave had forty thousand lives!
One is too poor, too weak for my revenge.
Now do I see ’tis true. Look here, Iago,
All my fond love thus do I blow to heaven.
’Tis gone.
Arise, black vengeance, from the hollow hell!
Yield up, O love, thy crown and hearted throne
To tyrannous hate! Swell, bosom, with thy fraught,
For ’tis of aspics’ tongues!
IAGO  Yet be content.
OTHELLO  O, blood, blood, blood!
IAGO
Patience, I say. Your mind perhaps may change.
OTHELLO
Never, Iago. Like to the Pontic Sea,
Whose icy current and compulsive course
Ne’er feels retiring ebb, but keeps due on
To the Propontic and the Hellespont,
Even so my bloody thoughts, with violent pace
Shall ne’er look back, ne’er ebb to humble love,
Till that a capable and wide revenge
Swallow them up. He kneels. Now by yond marble
heaven,
In the due reverence of a sacred vow,
I here engage my words.
IAGO  Do not rise yet.                                                        	
Iago kneels.
Witness, you ever-burning lights above,
You elements that clip us round about,
Witness that here Iago doth give up
The execution of his wit, hands, heart
To wronged Othello’s service! Let him command,
And to obey shall be in me remorse,
What bloody business ever.                                               	
They rise.
OTHELLO  I greet thy love
Not with vain thanks but with acceptance
bounteous,
And will upon the instant put thee to ’t.
Within these three days let me hear thee say
That Cassio’s not alive.
IAGO  My friend is dead.
’Tis done at your request. But let her live.
OTHELLO  Damn her, lewd minx! O, damn her, damn
her!
Come, go with me apart. I will withdraw
To furnish me with some swift means of death
For the fair devil. Now art thou my lieutenant.
IAGO  I am your own forever.
They exit.
 
Scene 4
Enter Desdemona, Emilia, and Clown.
 
DESDEMONA  Do you know, sirrah, where Lieutenant
Cassio lies?
CLOWN  I dare not say he lies anywhere.
DESDEMONA  Why, man?
CLOWN  He’s a soldier, and for me to say a soldier lies,
’tis stabbing.
DESDEMONA  Go to! Where lodges he?
CLOWN  To tell you where he lodges is to tell you
where I lie.
DESDEMONA  Can anything be made of this?
CLOWN  I know not where he lodges; and for me to
devise a lodging and say he lies here, or he lies
there, were to lie in mine own throat.
DESDEMONA  Can you inquire him out, and be edified
by report?
CLOWN  I will catechize the world for him—that is,
make questions, and by them answer.
DESDEMONA  Seek him, bid him come hither. Tell him I
have moved my lord on his behalf and hope all will
be well.
CLOWN  To do this is within the compass of man’s wit,
and therefore I will attempt the doing it.
Clown exits.
DESDEMONA
Where should I lose that handkerchief, Emilia?
EMILIA  I know not, madam.
DESDEMONA
Believe me, I had rather have lost my purse
Full of crusadoes. And but my noble Moor
Is true of mind and made of no such baseness
As jealous creatures are, it were enough
To put him to ill thinking.
EMILIA  Is he not jealous?
DESDEMONA
Who, he? I think the sun where he was born
Drew all such humors from him.
EMILIA  Look where he
comes.
 
Enter Othello.
 
DESDEMONA
I will not leave him now till Cassio
Be called to him.—How is ’t with you, my lord?
OTHELLO
Well, my good lady. Aside. O, hardness to
dissemble!—
How do you, Desdemona?
DESDEMONA  Well, my good lord.
OTHELLO
Give me your hand. He takes her hand. This hand
is moist, my lady.
DESDEMONA
It yet has felt no age nor known no sorrow.
OTHELLO
This argues fruitfulness and liberal heart.
Hot, hot, and moist. This hand of yours requires
A sequester from liberty, fasting and prayer,
Much castigation, exercise devout;
For here’s a young and sweating devil here
That commonly rebels. ’Tis a good hand,
A frank one.
DESDEMONA  You may indeed say so,
For ’twas that hand that gave away my heart.
OTHELLO
A liberal hand! The hearts of old gave hands,
But our new heraldry is hands, not hearts.
DESDEMONA
I cannot speak of this. Come now, your promise.
OTHELLO  What promise, chuck?
DESDEMONA
I have sent to bid Cassio come speak with you.
OTHELLO
I have a salt and sorry rheum offends me.
Lend me thy handkerchief.
DESDEMONA  Here, my lord.
OTHELLO
That which I gave you.
DESDEMONA  I have it not about me.
OTHELLO  Not?
DESDEMONA  No, faith, my lord.
OTHELLO  That’s a fault. That handkerchief
Did an Egyptian to my mother give.
She was a charmer, and could almost read
The thoughts of people. She told her, while she kept
it,
’Twould make her amiable and subdue my father
Entirely to her love. But if she lost it,
Or made a gift of it, my father’s eye
Should hold her loathèd, and his spirits should hunt
After new fancies. She, dying, gave it me,
And bid me, when my fate would have me wived,
To give it her. I did so; and take heed on ’t,
Make it a darling like your precious eye.
To lose ’t or give ’t away were such perdition
As nothing else could match.
DESDEMONA  Is ’t possible?
OTHELLO
’Tis true. There’s magic in the web of it.
A sybil that had numbered in the world
The sun to course two hundred compasses,
In her prophetic fury sewed the work.
The worms were hallowed that did breed the silk,
And it was dyed in mummy, which the skillful
Conserved of maidens’ hearts.
DESDEMONA  I’ faith, is ’t true?
OTHELLO
Most veritable. Therefore, look to ’t well.
DESDEMONA
Then would to God that I had never seen ’t!
OTHELLO  Ha? Wherefore?
DESDEMONA
Why do you speak so startingly and rash?
OTHELLO
Is ’t lost? Is ’t gone? Speak, is ’t out o’ th’ way?
DESDEMONA  Heaven bless us!
OTHELLO  Say you?
DESDEMONA
It is not lost, but what an if it were?
OTHELLO  How?
DESDEMONA  I say it is not lost.
OTHELLO  Fetch ’t. Let me see ’t!
DESDEMONA
Why, so I can. But I will not now.
This is a trick to put me from my suit.
Pray you, let Cassio be received again.
OTHELLO
Fetch me the handkerchief! Aside. My mind
misgives.
DESDEMONA  Come, come.
You’ll never meet a more sufficient man.
OTHELLO
The handkerchief!
DESDEMONA  I pray, talk me of Cassio.
OTHELLOThe handkerchief!
DESDEMONA  A man that all his time
Hath founded his good fortunes on your love;
Shared dangers with you—
OTHELLO
The handkerchief!
DESDEMONA  I’ faith, you are to blame.
OTHELLO  Zounds!                                                         	
Othello exits.
EMILIA  Is not this man jealous?
DESDEMONA  I ne’er saw this before.
Sure, there’s some wonder in this handkerchief!
I am most unhappy in the loss of it.
EMILIA
’Tis not a year or two shows us a man.
They are all but stomachs, and we all but food;
They eat us hungerly, and when they are full
They belch us.
 
Enter Iago and Cassio.
 
Look you—Cassio and my husband.
IAGO, to Cassio
There is no other way; ’tis she must do ’t,
And, lo, the happiness! Go and importune her.
DESDEMONA
How now, good Cassio, what’s the news with you?
CASSIO
Madam, my former suit. I do beseech you
That by your virtuous means I may again
Exist, and be a member of his love
Whom I with all the office of my heart
Entirely honor. I would not be delayed.
If my offense be of such mortal kind
That nor my service past nor present sorrows
Nor purposed merit in futurity
Can ransom me into his love again,
But to know so must be my benefit.
So shall I clothe me in a forced content,
And shut myself up in some other course
To fortune’s alms.
DESDEMONA  Alas, thrice-gentle Cassio,
My advocation is not now in tune.
My lord is not my lord; nor should I know him
Were he in favor as in humor altered.
So help me every spirit sanctified
As I have spoken for you all my best,
And stood within the blank of his displeasure
For my free speech! You must awhile be patient.
What I can do I will; and more I will
Than for myself I dare. Let that suffice you.
IAGO
Is my lord angry?
EMILIA  He went hence but now,
And certainly in strange unquietness.
IAGO
Can he be angry? I have seen the cannon
When it hath blown his ranks into the air
And, like the devil, from his very arm
Puffed his own brother—and is he angry?
Something of moment then. I will go meet him.
There’s matter in ’t indeed if he be angry.
DESDEMONA
I prithee do so.                                                                      	
He exits.
Something, sure, of state,
Either from Venice, or some unhatched practice
Made demonstrable here in Cyprus to him,
Hath puddled his clear spirit; and in such cases
Men’s natures wrangle with inferior things,
Though great ones are their object. ’Tis even so.
For let our finger ache, and it endues
Our other healthful members even to a sense
Of pain. Nay, we must think men are not gods,
Nor of them look for such observancy
As fits the bridal. Beshrew me much, Emilia,
I was—unhandsome warrior as I am!—
Arraigning his unkindness with my soul.
But now I find I had suborned the witness,
And he’s indicted falsely.
EMILIA  Pray heaven it be
State matters, as you think, and no conception
Nor no jealous toy concerning you.
DESDEMONA
Alas the day, I never gave him cause!
EMILIA
But jealous souls will not be answered so.
They are not ever jealous for the cause,
But jealous for they’re jealous. It is a monster
Begot upon itself, born on itself.
DESDEMONA
Heaven keep that monster from Othello’s mind!
EMILIA  Lady, amen.
DESDEMONA
I will go seek him.—Cassio, walk hereabout.
If I do find him fit, I’ll move your suit
And seek to effect it to my uttermost.
CASSIO  I humbly thank your Ladyship.
Desdemona and Emilia exit.
 
Enter Bianca.
 
BIANCA
’Save you, friend Cassio!
CASSIO  What make you from
home?
How is ’t with you, my most fair Bianca?
I’ faith, sweet love, I was coming to your house.
BIANCA
And I was going to your lodging, Cassio.
What, keep a week away? Seven days and nights,
Eightscore eight hours, and lovers’ absent hours
More tedious than the dial eightscore times?
O weary reck’ning!
CASSIO  Pardon me, Bianca.
I have this while with leaden thoughts been pressed,
But I shall in a more continuate time
Strike off this score of absence. Sweet Bianca,
Giving her Desdemona’s handkerchief.
Take me this work out.
BIANCA  O, Cassio, whence came this?
This is some token from a newer friend.
To the felt absence now I feel a cause.
Is ’t come to this? Well, well.
CASSIO  Go to, woman!
Throw your vile guesses in the devil’s teeth,
From whence you have them. You are jealous now
That this is from some mistress, some
remembrance.
No, by my faith, Bianca.
BIANCA  Why, whose is it?
CASSIO
I know not neither. I found it in my chamber.
I like the work well. Ere it be demanded,
As like enough it will, I would have it copied.
Take it, and do ’t, and leave me for this time.
BIANCA  Leave you? Wherefore?
CASSIO
I do attend here on the General,
And think it no addition, nor my wish,
To have him see me womaned.
BIANCA  Why, I pray you?
CASSIO  Not that I love you not.
BIANCA  But that you do not love me!
I pray you bring me on the way a little,
And say if I shall see you soon at night.
CASSIO
’Tis but a little way that I can bring you,
For I attend here. But I’ll see you soon.
BIANCA
’Tis very good. I must be circumstanced.
They exit.
 
 
 

 
 
ACT 4
 
Scene 1
Enter Othello and Iago.
 
IAGO
Will you think so?
OTHELLO  Think so, Iago?
IAGO  What,
To kiss in private?
OTHELLO  An unauthorized kiss!
IAGO
Or to be naked with her friend in bed
An hour or more, not meaning any harm?
OTHELLO
Naked in bed, Iago, and not mean harm?
It is hypocrisy against the devil!
They that mean virtuously, and yet do so,
The devil their virtue tempts, and they tempt
heaven.
IAGO
If they do nothing, ’tis a venial slip.
But if I give my wife a handkerchief—
OTHELLO  What then?
IAGO
Why then, ’tis hers, my lord, and being hers,
She may, I think, bestow ’t on any man.
OTHELLO
She is protectress of her honor, too.
May she give that?
IAGO
Her honor is an essence that’s not seen;
They have it very oft that have it not.
But for the handkerchief—
OTHELLO
By heaven, I would most gladly have forgot it.
Thou saidst—O, it comes o’er my memory
As doth the raven o’er the infectious house,
Boding to all—he had my handkerchief.
IAGO
Ay, what of that?
OTHELLO  That’s not so good now.
IAGO  What
If I had said I had seen him do you wrong?
Or heard him say (as knaves be such abroad,
Who having, by their own importunate suit
Or voluntary dotage of some mistress,
Convincèd or supplied them, cannot choose
But they must blab)—
OTHELLO  Hath he said anything?
IAGO
He hath, my lord, but be you well assured,
No more than he’ll unswear.
OTHELLO  What hath he said?
IAGO
Faith, that he did—I know not what he did.
OTHELLO  What? What?
IAGO
Lie—
OTHELLO  With her?
IAGO  With her—on her—what you will.
OTHELLO  Lie with her? Lie on her? We say “lie on her”
when they belie her. Lie with her—Zounds, that’s
fulsome! Handkerchief—confessions—handkerchief.
To confess and be hanged for his labor.
First to be hanged and then to confess—I tremble
at it. Nature would not invest herself in such shadowing
passion without some instruction. It is not
words that shakes me thus. Pish! Noses, ears, and
lips—is ’t possible? Confess—handkerchief—O,
devil!                                                                	
He falls in a trance.
IAGO  Work on,
My medicine, work! Thus credulous fools are
caught,
And many worthy and chaste dames even thus,
All guiltless, meet reproach.—What ho! My lord!
My lord, I say. Othello!
 
Enter Cassio.
 
How now, Cassio?
CASSIO  What’s the matter?
IAGO
My lord is fall’n into an epilepsy.
This is his second fit. He had one yesterday.
CASSIO
Rub him about the temples.
IAGO  No, forbear.
The lethargy must have his quiet course.
If not, he foams at mouth, and by and by
Breaks out to savage madness. Look, he stirs.
Do you withdraw yourself a little while.
He will recover straight. When he is gone,
I would on great occasion speak with you.
Cassio exits.
How is it, general? Have you not hurt your head?
OTHELLO
Dost thou mock me?
IAGO  I mock you not, by heaven!
Would you would bear your fortune like a man!
OTHELLO
A hornèd man’s a monster and a beast.
IAGO
There’s many a beast, then, in a populous city,
And many a civil monster.
OTHELLO
Did he confess it?
IAGO  Good sir, be a man!
Think every bearded fellow that’s but yoked
May draw with you. There’s millions now alive
That nightly lie in those unproper beds
Which they dare swear peculiar. Your case is better.
O, ’tis the spite of hell, the fiend’s arch-mock,
To lip a wanton in a secure couch
And to suppose her chaste! No, let me know,
And knowing what I am, I know what she shall be.
OTHELLO  O, thou art wise, ’tis certain.
IAGO  Stand you awhile apart.
Confine yourself but in a patient list.
Whilst you were here, o’erwhelmèd with your grief—
A passion most unsuiting such a man—
Cassio came hither. I shifted him away
And laid good ’scuses upon your ecstasy,
Bade him anon return and here speak with me,
The which he promised. Do but encave yourself,
And mark the fleers, the gibes, and notable scorns
That dwell in every region of his face.
For I will make him tell the tale anew—
Where, how, how oft, how long ago, and when
He hath and is again to cope your wife.
I say but mark his gesture. Marry, patience,
Or I shall say you’re all in all in spleen,
And nothing of a man.
OTHELLO  Dost thou hear, Iago,
I will be found most cunning in my patience,
But (dost thou hear?) most bloody.
IAGO  That’s not amiss.
But yet keep time in all. Will you withdraw?
Othello withdraws.
Now will I question Cassio of Bianca,
A huswife that by selling her desires
Buys herself bread and clothes. It is a creature
That dotes on Cassio—as ’tis the strumpet’s plague
To beguile many and be beguiled by one.
He, when he hears of her, cannot restrain
From the excess of laughter. Here he comes.
 
Enter Cassio.
 
As he shall smile, Othello shall go mad,
And his unbookish jealousy must construe
Poor Cassio’s smiles, gestures, and light behaviors
Quite in the wrong.—How do you, lieutenant?
CASSIO
The worser that you give me the addition
Whose want even kills me.
IAGO
Ply Desdemona well, and you are sure on ’t.
Now, if this suit lay in Bianca’s power,
How quickly should you speed!
CASSIO, laughing  Alas, poor caitiff!
OTHELLO  Look how he laughs already!
IAGO  I never knew woman love man so.
CASSIO
Alas, poor rogue, I think i’ faith she loves me.
OTHELLO
Now he denies it faintly and laughs it out.
IAGO
Do you hear, Cassio?
OTHELLO  Now he importunes him
To tell it o’er. Go to, well said, well said.
IAGO
She gives it out that you shall marry her.
Do you intend it?
CASSIO  Ha, ha, ha!
OTHELLO
Do you triumph, Roman? Do you triumph?
CASSIO  I marry her? What, a customer? Prithee bear
some charity to my wit! Do not think it so unwholesome.
Ha, ha, ha!
OTHELLO  So, so, so, so. They laugh that wins.
IAGO
Faith, the cry goes that you marry her.
CASSIO  Prithee say true!
IAGO  I am a very villain else.
OTHELLO  Have you scored me? Well.
CASSIO  This is the monkey’s own giving out. She is
persuaded I will marry her out of her own love and
flattery, not out of my promise.
OTHELLO
Iago beckons me. Now he begins the story.
CASSIO  She was here even now. She haunts me in
every place. I was the other day talking on the
sea-bank with certain Venetians, and thither comes
the bauble. By this hand, she falls thus about my
neck!
OTHELLO  Crying, “O dear Cassio,” as it were; his
gesture imports it.
CASSIO  So hangs and lolls and weeps upon me, so
shakes and pulls me. Ha, ha, ha!
OTHELLO  Now he tells how she plucked him to my
chamber.—O, I see that nose of yours, but not that
dog I shall throw it to.
CASSIO  Well, I must leave her company.
IAGO  Before me, look where she comes.
 
Enter Bianca.
 
CASSIO  ’Tis such another fitchew—marry, a perfumed
one!—What do you mean by this haunting
of me?
BIANCA  Let the devil and his dam haunt you! What did
you mean by that same handkerchief you gave me
even now? I was a fine fool to take it! I must take
out the work? A likely piece of work, that you
should find it in your chamber and know not who
left it there! This is some minx’s token, and I must
take out the work! There, give it your hobbyhorse.
Wheresoever you had it, I’ll take out no work on ’t.
CASSIO
How now, my sweet Bianca? How now? How now?
OTHELLO
By heaven, that should be my handkerchief!
BIANCA  If you’ll come to supper tonight you may. If
you will not, come when you are next prepared
for.                                                                                     	
She exits.
IAGO  After her, after her!
CASSIO  Faith, I must. She’ll rail in the streets else.
IAGO  Will you sup there?
CASSIO  Faith, I intend so.
IAGO  Well, I may chance to see you, for I would very
fain speak with you.
CASSIO  Prithee come. Will you?
IAGO  Go to; say no more.                                                	
Cassio exits.
OTHELLO, coming forward  How shall I murder him,
Iago?
IAGO  Did you perceive how he laughed at his vice?
OTHELLO  O Iago!
IAGO  And did you see the handkerchief?
OTHELLO  Was that mine?
IAGO  Yours, by this hand! And to see how he prizes
the foolish woman your wife! She gave it him, and
he hath giv’n it his whore.
OTHELLO  I would have him nine years a-killing! A fine
woman, a fair woman, a sweet woman!
IAGO  Nay, you must forget that.
OTHELLO  Ay, let her rot and perish and be damned
tonight, for she shall not live. No, my heart is turned
to stone. I strike it, and it hurts my hand. O, the
world hath not a sweeter creature! She might lie by
an emperor’s side and command him tasks.
IAGO  Nay, that’s not your way.
OTHELLO  Hang her, I do but say what she is! So
delicate with her needle, an admirable musician—
O, she will sing the savageness out of a bear!
Of so high and plenteous wit and invention!
IAGO  She’s the worse for all this.
OTHELLO  O, a thousand, a thousand times!—And then
of so gentle a condition!
IAGO  Ay, too gentle.
OTHELLO  Nay, that’s certain. But yet the pity of it,
Iago! O, Iago, the pity of it, Iago!
IAGO  If you are so fond over her iniquity, give her
patent to offend, for if it touch not you, it comes
near nobody.
OTHELLO  I will chop her into messes! Cuckold me?
IAGO  O, ’tis foul in her.
OTHELLO  With mine officer!
IAGO  That’s fouler.
OTHELLO  Get me some poison, Iago, this night. I’ll not
expostulate with her lest her body and beauty
unprovide my mind again. This night, Iago.
IAGO  Do it not with poison. Strangle her in her bed,
even the bed she hath contaminated.
OTHELLO  Good, good. The justice of it pleases. Very
good.
IAGO  And for Cassio, let me be his undertaker. You
shall hear more by midnight.
OTHELLO
Excellent good.                                                     	
A trumpet sounds.
What trumpet is that same?
IAGO  I warrant something from Venice.
 
Enter Lodovico, Desdemona, and Attendants.
 
’Tis Lodovico. This comes from the Duke.
See, your wife’s with him.
LODOVICO  God save you, worthy general.
OTHELLO  With all my heart, sir.
LODOVICO
The Duke and the Senators of Venice greet you.
He hands Othello a paper.
OTHELLO
I kiss the instrument of their pleasures.
DESDEMONA
And what’s the news, good cousin Lodovico?
IAGO
I am very glad to see you, signior.
Welcome to Cyprus.
LODOVICO
I thank you. How does Lieutenant Cassio?
IAGO  Lives, sir.
DESDEMONA
Cousin, there’s fall’n between him and my lord
An unkind breach, but you shall make all well.
OTHELLO  Are you sure of that?
DESDEMONA  My lord?
OTHELLO, reading  “This fail you not to do, as you
will”—
LODOVICO
He did not call; he’s busy in the paper.
Is there division ’twixt my lord and Cassio?
DESDEMONA
A most unhappy one. I would do much
T’ atone them, for the love I bear to Cassio.
OTHELLO  Fire and brimstone!
DESDEMONA  My lord?
OTHELLO  Are you wise?
DESDEMONA
What, is he angry?
LODOVICO  May be the letter moved him.
For, as I think, they do command him home,
Deputing Cassio in his government.
DESDEMONA  By my troth, I am glad on ’t.
OTHELLO  Indeed?
DESDEMONA  My lord?
OTHELLO  I am glad to see you mad.
DESDEMONA  Why, sweet Othello!
OTHELLO, striking her  Devil!
DESDEMONA  I have not deserved this.
LODOVICO
My lord, this would not be believed in Venice,
Though I should swear I saw ’t. ’Tis very much.
Make her amends. She weeps.
OTHELLO  O, devil, devil!
If that the Earth could teem with woman’s tears,
Each drop she falls would prove a crocodile.
Out of my sight!
DESDEMONA  I will not stay to offend you.
She begins to leave.
LODOVICO  Truly an obedient lady.
I do beseech your Lordship call her back.
OTHELLO  Mistress.
DESDEMONA, turning back  My lord?
OTHELLO  What would you with her, sir?
LODOVICO  Who, I, my lord?
OTHELLO
Ay, you did wish that I would make her turn.
Sir, she can turn, and turn, and yet go on,
And turn again. And she can weep, sir, weep.
And she’s obedient, as you say, obedient.
Very obedient.—Proceed you in your tears.—
Concerning this, sir—O, well-painted passion!—
I am commanded home.—Get you away.
I’ll send for you anon.—Sir, I obey the mandate
And will return to Venice.—Hence, avaunt!
Desdemona exits.
Cassio shall have my place. And, sir, tonight
I do entreat that we may sup together.
You are welcome, sir, to Cyprus. Goats and
monkeys!                                                                            	
He exits.
LODOVICO
Is this the noble Moor, whom our full senate
Call all in all sufficient? Is this the nature
Whom passion could not shake, whose solid virtue
The shot of accident nor dart of chance
Could neither graze nor pierce?
IAGO  He is much
changed.
LODOVICO
Are his wits safe? Is he not light of brain?
IAGO
He’s that he is. I may not breathe my censure
What he might be. If what he might he is not,
I would to heaven he were.
LODOVICO  What? Strike his wife?
IAGO
’Faith, that was not so well. Yet would I knew
That stroke would prove the worst.
LODOVICO  Is it his use?
Or did the letters work upon his blood
And new-create this fault?
IAGO  Alas, alas!
It is not honesty in me to speak
What I have seen and known. You shall observe
him,
And his own courses will denote him so
That I may save my speech. Do but go after
And mark how he continues.
LODOVICO
I am sorry that I am deceived in him.
They exit.
 
Scene 2
Enter Othello and Emilia.
 
OTHELLO  You have seen nothing then?
EMILIA
Nor ever heard, nor ever did suspect.
OTHELLO
Yes, you have seen Cassio and she together.
EMILIA
But then I saw no harm, and then I heard
Each syllable that breath made up between them.
OTHELLO
What, did they never whisper?
EMILIA  Never, my lord.
OTHELLO  Nor send you out o’ th’ way?
EMILIA  Never.
OTHELLO
To fetch her fan, her gloves, her mask, nor nothing?
EMILIA  Never, my lord.
OTHELLO  That’s strange.
EMILIA
I durst, my lord, to wager she is honest,
Lay down my soul at stake. If you think other,
Remove your thought. It doth abuse your bosom.
If any wretch have put this in your head,
Let heaven requite it with the serpent’s curse,
For if she be not honest, chaste, and true,
There’s no man happy. The purest of their wives
Is foul as slander.
OTHELLO  Bid her come hither. Go.
Emilia exits.
She says enough. Yet she’s a simple bawd
That cannot say as much. This is a subtle whore,
A closet lock and key of villainous secrets.
And yet she’ll kneel and pray. I have seen her do ’t.
 
Enter Desdemona and Emilia.
 
DESDEMONA  My lord, what is your will?
OTHELLO
Pray you, chuck, come hither.
DESDEMONA  What is your
pleasure?
OTHELLO
Let me see your eyes. Look in my face.
DESDEMONA  What horrible fancy’s this?
OTHELLO, to Emilia  Some of your function,
mistress.
Leave procreants alone, and shut the door.
Cough, or cry “hem,” if anybody come.
Your mystery, your mystery! Nay, dispatch.
Emilia exits.
DESDEMONA, kneeling
Upon my knees, what doth your speech import?
I understand a fury in your words,
But not the words.
OTHELLO  Why? What art thou?
DESDEMONA
Your wife, my lord, your true and loyal wife.
OTHELLO  Come, swear it. Damn thyself,
Lest, being like one of heaven, the devils themselves
Should fear to seize thee. Therefore be double
damned.
Swear thou art honest.
DESDEMONA  Heaven doth truly know it.
OTHELLO
Heaven truly knows that thou art false as hell.
DESDEMONA, standing
To whom, my lord? With whom? How am I false?
OTHELLO
Ah, Desdemon, away, away, away!
DESDEMONA
Alas the heavy day, why do you weep?
Am I the motive of these tears, my lord?
If haply you my father do suspect
An instrument of this your calling back,
Lay not your blame on me. If you have lost him,
I have lost him too.
OTHELLO  Had it pleased heaven
To try me with affliction, had they rained
All kind of sores and shames on my bare head,
Steeped me in poverty to the very lips,
Given to captivity me and my utmost hopes,
I should have found in some place of my soul
A drop of patience. But alas, to make me
A fixèd figure for the time of scorn
To point his slow unmoving finger at—
Yet could I bear that too, well, very well.
But there where I have garnered up my heart,
Where either I must live or bear no life,
The fountain from the which my current runs
Or else dries up—to be discarded thence,
Or keep it as a cistern for foul toads
To knot and gender in—turn thy complexion there,
Patience, thou young and rose-lipped cherubin,
Ay, there look grim as hell.
DESDEMONA
I hope my noble lord esteems me honest.
OTHELLO
O, ay, as summer flies are in the shambles,
That quicken even with blowing! O thou weed,
Who art so lovely fair, and smell’st so sweet
That the sense aches at thee, would thou hadst
ne’er been born!
DESDEMONA
Alas, what ignorant sin have I committed?
OTHELLO
Was this fair paper, this most goodly book,
Made to write “whore” upon? What committed?
Committed? O thou public commoner,
I should make very forges of my cheeks
That would to cinders burn up modesty,
Did I but speak thy deeds. What committed?
Heaven stops the nose at it, and the moon winks;
The bawdy wind that kisses all it meets
Is hushed within the hollow mine of earth
And will not hear ’t. What committed?
Impudent strumpet!
DESDEMONA  By heaven, you do me wrong!
OTHELLO  Are not you a strumpet?
DESDEMONA  No, as I am a Christian!
If to preserve this vessel for my lord
From any other foul unlawful touch
Be not to be a strumpet, I am none.
OTHELLO  What, not a whore?
DESDEMONA  No, as I shall be saved.
OTHELLO  Is ’t possible?
DESDEMONA
O, heaven forgive us!
OTHELLO  I cry you mercy, then.
I took you for that cunning whore of Venice
That married with Othello.—You, mistress,
 
Enter Emilia.
 
That have the office opposite to Saint Peter
And keeps the gate of hell—you, you, ay, you!
We have done our course. There’s money for your
pains.                                                               	
He gives her money.
I pray you turn the key and keep our counsel.
He exits.
EMILIA
Alas, what does this gentleman conceive?
How do you, madam? How do you, my good lady?
DESDEMONA  Faith, half asleep.
EMILIA
Good madam, what’s the matter with my lord?
DESDEMONA  With who?
EMILIA  Why, with my lord, madam.
DESDEMONA
Who is thy lord?
EMILIA  He that is yours, sweet lady.
DESDEMONA
I have none. Do not talk to me, Emilia.
I cannot weep, nor answers have I none
But what should go by water. Prithee, tonight
Lay on my bed my wedding sheets. Remember.
And call thy husband hither.
EMILIA  Here’s a change indeed.                                          	
She exits.
DESDEMONA
’Tis meet I should be used so, very meet.
How have I been behaved that he might stick
The small’st opinion on my least misuse?
 
Enter Iago and Emilia.
 
IAGO
What is your pleasure, madam? How is ’t with you?
DESDEMONA
I cannot tell. Those that do teach young babes
Do it with gentle means and easy tasks.
He might have chid me so, for, in good faith,
I am a child to chiding.
IAGO  What is the matter, lady?
EMILIA
Alas, Iago, my lord hath so bewhored her,
Thrown such despite and heavy terms upon her
As true hearts cannot bear.
DESDEMONA
Am I that name, Iago?
IAGO  What name, fair
lady?
DESDEMONA
Such as she said my lord did say I was.
EMILIA
He called her “whore.” A beggar in his drink
Could not have laid such terms upon his callet.
IAGO  Why did he so?
DESDEMONA
I do not know. I am sure I am none such.
IAGO
Do not weep, do not weep! Alas the day!
EMILIA
Hath she forsook so many noble matches,
Her father and her country and her friends,
To be called “whore”? Would it not make one
weep?
DESDEMONA  It is my wretched fortune.
IAGO
Beshrew him for ’t! How comes this trick upon him?
DESDEMONA  Nay, heaven doth know.
EMILIA
I will be hanged if some eternal villain,
Some busy and insinuating rogue,
Some cogging, cozening slave, to get some office,
Have not devised this slander. I will be hanged else.
IAGO
Fie, there is no such man. It is impossible.
DESDEMONA
If any such there be, heaven pardon him.
EMILIA
A halter pardon him, and hell gnaw his bones!
Why should he call her “whore”? Who keeps her
company?
What place? What time? What form? What
likelihood?
The Moor’s abused by some most villainous knave,
Some base notorious knave, some scurvy fellow.
O heaven, that such companions thou ’dst unfold,
And put in every honest hand a whip
To lash the rascals naked through the world,
Even from the east to th’ west!
IAGO  Speak within door.
EMILIA
O, fie upon them! Some such squire he was
That turned your wit the seamy side without
And made you to suspect me with the Moor.
IAGO
You are a fool. Go to!
DESDEMONA  Alas, Iago,
What shall I do to win my lord again?
Good friend, go to him. For by this light of heaven,
I know not how I lost him. She kneels. Here I
kneel.
If e’er my will did trespass ’gainst his love,
Either in discourse of thought or actual deed,
Or that mine eyes, mine ears, or any sense
Delighted them in any other form,
Or that I do not yet, and ever did,
And ever will—though he do shake me off
To beggarly divorcement—love him dearly,
Comfort forswear me! She stands. Unkindness may
do much,
And his unkindness may defeat my life,
But never taint my love. I cannot say “whore”—
It does abhor me now I speak the word.
To do the act that might the addition earn,
Not the world’s mass of vanity could make me.
IAGO
I pray you be content. ’Tis but his humor.
The business of the state does him offense,
And he does chide with you.
DESDEMONA
If ’twere no other—
IAGO  It is but so, I warrant.
Trumpets sound.
Hark how these instruments summon to supper.
The messengers of Venice stays the meat.
Go in and weep not. All things shall be well.
Desdemona and Emilia exit.
 
Enter Roderigo.
 
How now, Roderigo?
RODERIGO  I do not find
That thou deal’st justly with me.
IAGO  What in the contrary?
RODERIGO  Every day thou daff’st me with some device,
Iago, and rather, as it seems to me now,
keep’st from me all conveniency than suppliest me
with the least advantage of hope. I will indeed no
longer endure it. Nor am I yet persuaded to put up
in peace what already I have foolishly suffered.
IAGO  Will you hear me, Roderigo?
RODERIGO  Faith, I have heard too much, and your
words and performances are no kin together.
IAGO  You charge me most unjustly.
RODERIGO  With naught but truth. I have wasted myself
out of my means. The jewels you have had
from me to deliver to Desdemona would half have
corrupted a votaress. You have told me she hath
received them, and returned me expectations and
comforts of sudden respect and acquaintance, but I
find none.
IAGO  Well, go to! Very well.
RODERIGO  “Very well.” “Go to!” I cannot go to, man,
nor ’tis not very well! By this hand, I say ’tis very
scurvy, and begin to find myself fopped in it.
IAGO  Very well.
RODERIGO  I tell you ’tis not very well! I will make
myself known to Desdemona. If she will return me
my jewels, I will give over my suit and repent my
unlawful solicitation. If not, assure yourself I will
seek satisfaction of you.
IAGO  You have said now.
RODERIGO  Ay, and said nothing but what I protest
intendment of doing.
IAGO  Why, now I see there’s mettle in thee, and even
from this instant do build on thee a better opinion
than ever before. Give me thy hand, Roderigo.
Thou hast taken against me a most just exception,
but yet I protest I have dealt most directly in thy
affair.
RODERIGO  It hath not appeared.
IAGO  I grant indeed it hath not appeared, and your
suspicion is not without wit and judgment. But,
Roderigo, if thou hast that in thee indeed which I
have greater reason to believe now than ever—I
mean purpose, courage, and valor—this night show
it. If thou the next night following enjoy not Desdemona,
take me from this world with treachery and
devise engines for my life.
RODERIGO  Well, what is it? Is it within reason and
compass?
IAGO  Sir, there is especial commission come from
Venice to depute Cassio in Othello’s place.
RODERIGO  Is that true? Why, then, Othello and Desdemona
return again to Venice.
IAGO  O, no. He goes into Mauritania and takes away
with him the fair Desdemona, unless his abode be
lingered here by some accident—wherein none
can be so determinate as the removing of Cassio.
RODERIGO  How do you mean, removing him?
IAGO  Why, by making him uncapable of Othello’s
place: knocking out his brains.
RODERIGO  And that you would have me to do?
IAGO  Ay, if you dare do yourself a profit and a right. He
sups tonight with a harlotry, and thither will I go to
him. He knows not yet of his honorable fortune. If
you will watch his going thence (which I will
fashion to fall out between twelve and one), you may
take him at your pleasure. I will be near to second
your attempt, and he shall fall between us. Come,
stand not amazed at it, but go along with me. I will
show you such a necessity in his death that you shall
think yourself bound to put it on him. It is now high
supper time, and the night grows to waste. About it!
RODERIGO  I will hear further reason for this.
IAGO  And you shall be satisfied.
They exit.
 
Scene 3
Enter Othello, Lodovico, Desdemona, Emilia, and
Attendants.
 
LODOVICO
I do beseech you, sir, trouble yourself no further.
OTHELLO
O, pardon me, ’twill do me good to walk.
LODOVICO
Madam, good night. I humbly thank your Ladyship.
DESDEMONA  Your Honor is most welcome.
OTHELLO
Will you walk, sir?—O, Desdemona—
DESDEMONA  My lord?
OTHELLO  Get you to bed on th’ instant. I will be
returned forthwith. Dismiss your attendant there.
Look ’t be done.
DESDEMONA  I will, my lord.
All but Desdemona and Emilia exit.
EMILIA
How goes it now? He looks gentler than he did.
DESDEMONA
He says he will return incontinent,
And hath commanded me to go to bed,
And bade me to dismiss you.
EMILIA  Dismiss me?
DESDEMONA
It was his bidding. Therefore, good Emilia,
Give me my nightly wearing, and adieu.
We must not now displease him.
EMILIA  I would you had never seen him.
DESDEMONA
So would not I. My love doth so approve him
That even his stubbornness, his checks, his frowns—
Prithee, unpin me—have grace and favor in them.
EMILIA
I have laid those sheets you bade me on the bed.
DESDEMONA
All’s one. Good faith, how foolish are our minds!
If I do die before thee, prithee, shroud me
In one of those same sheets.
EMILIA  Come, come, you talk!
DESDEMONA
My mother had a maid called Barbary.
She was in love, and he she loved proved mad
And did forsake her. She had a song of willow,
An old thing ’twas, but it expressed her fortune,
And she died singing it. That song tonight
Will not go from my mind. I have much to do
But to go hang my head all at one side
And sing it like poor Barbary. Prithee, dispatch.
EMILIA  Shall I go fetch your nightgown?
DESDEMONA  No, unpin me here.
This Lodovico is a proper man.
EMILIA  A very handsome man.
DESDEMONA  He speaks well.
EMILIA  I know a lady in Venice would have walked
barefoot to Palestine for a touch of his nether lip.
DESDEMONA, singing
       	The poor soul sat sighing by a sycamore tree,
       	   Sing all a green willow.
       	Her hand on her bosom, her head on her knee,
       	   Sing willow, willow, willow.
       	The fresh streams ran by her and murmured her
moans,
       	   Sing willow, willow, willow;
       	Her salt tears fell from her, and softened the
stones—
Lay by these.
       	   Sing willow, willow, willow.
Prithee hie thee! He’ll come anon.
       	Sing all a green willow must be my garland.
       	Let nobody blame him, his scorn I approve.
Nay, that’s not next. Hark, who is ’t that knocks?
EMILIA  It’s the wind.
DESDEMONA
       	I called my love false love, but what said he then?
       	   Sing willow, willow, willow.
       	If I court more women, you’ll couch with more
men.—
So, get thee gone. Good night. Mine eyes do itch;
Doth that bode weeping?
EMILIA  ’Tis neither here nor there.
DESDEMONA
I have heard it said so. O these men, these men!
Dost thou in conscience think—tell me, Emilia—
That there be women do abuse their husbands
In such gross kind?
EMILIA  There be some such, no
question.
DESDEMONA
Wouldst thou do such a deed for all the world?
EMILIA
Why, would not you?
DESDEMONA  No, by this heavenly light!
EMILIA
Nor I neither, by this heavenly light.
I might do ’t as well i’ th’ dark.
DESDEMONA
Wouldst thou do such a deed for all the world?
EMILIA  The world’s a huge thing. It is a great price
for a small vice.
DESDEMONA  In troth, I think thou wouldst not.
EMILIA  In troth, I think I should, and undo ’t when I
had done it. Marry, I would not do such a thing for
a joint ring, nor for measures of lawn, nor for
gowns, petticoats, nor caps, nor any petty exhibition.
But for the whole world—’Uds pity! Who
would not make her husband a cuckold to make
him a monarch? I should venture purgatory for ’t.
DESDEMONA  Beshrew me if I would do such a wrong
for the whole world!
EMILIA  Why, the wrong is but a wrong i’ th’ world;
and, having the world for your labor, ’tis a wrong in
your own world, and you might quickly make it
right.
DESDEMONA  I do not think there is any such woman.
EMILIA  Yes, a dozen; and as many to th’ vantage as
would store the world they played for.
But I do think it is their husbands’ faults
If wives do fall. Say that they slack their duties,
And pour our treasures into foreign laps;
Or else break out in peevish jealousies,
Throwing restraint upon us. Or say they strike us,
Or scant our former having in despite.
Why, we have galls, and though we have some grace,
Yet have we some revenge. Let husbands know
Their wives have sense like them. They see, and
smell,
And have their palates both for sweet and sour,
As husbands have. What is it that they do
When they change us for others? Is it sport?
I think it is. And doth affection breed it?
I think it doth. Is ’t frailty that thus errs?
It is so too. And have not we affections,
Desires for sport, and frailty, as men have?
Then let them use us well. Else let them know,
The ills we do, their ills instruct us so.
DESDEMONA
Good night, good night. God me such uses send,
Not to pick bad from bad, but by bad mend.
They exit.
 
 
 

 
 
ACT 5
 
Scene 1
Enter Iago and Roderigo.
 
IAGO
Here, stand behind this bulk. Straight will he
come.
Wear thy good rapier bare, and put it home.
Quick, quick! Fear nothing. I’ll be at thy elbow.
It makes us or it mars us—think on that,
And fix most firm thy resolution.
RODERIGO
Be near at hand. I may miscarry in ’t.
IAGO
Here, at thy hand. Be bold and take thy stand.
He moves aside.
RODERIGO
I have no great devotion to the deed,
And yet he hath given me satisfying reasons.
’Tis but a man gone. Forth, my sword! He dies.
He draws his sword.
IAGO, aside
I have rubbed this young quat almost to the sense,
And he grows angry. Now, whether he kill Cassio,
Or Cassio him, or each do kill the other,
Every way makes my gain. Live Roderigo,
He calls me to a restitution large
Of gold and jewels that I bobbed from him
As gifts to Desdemona.
It must not be. If Cassio do remain,
He hath a daily beauty in his life
That makes me ugly. And besides, the Moor
May unfold me to him. There stand I in much peril.
No, he must die. Be ’t so. I hear him coming.
 
Enter Cassio.
 
RODERIGO
I know his gait. ’Tis he!—Villain, thou diest!
He thrusts at Cassio.
CASSIO
That thrust had been mine enemy indeed
But that my coat is better than thou know’st.
I will make proof of thine.
He draws, and stabs Roderigo.
RODERIGO  O, I am slain!
Roderigo falls.
Iago stabs Cassio in the leg, and exits.
CASSIO
I am maimed forever! Help, ho! Murder, murder!
 
Enter Othello.
 
OTHELLO
The voice of Cassio! Iago keeps his word.
RODERIGO  O, villain that I am!
OTHELLO, aside  It is even so.
CASSIO  O, help ho! Light! A surgeon!
OTHELLO, aside
’Tis he! O brave Iago, honest and just,
That hast such noble sense of thy friend’s wrong!
Thou teachest me.—Minion, your dear lies dead,
And your unblest fate hies. Strumpet, I come.
Forth of my heart those charms, thine eyes, are
blotted.
Thy bed, lust-stained, shall with lust’s blood be
spotted.                                                                        	
Othello exits.
 
Enter Lodovico and Gratiano.
 
CASSIO
What ho! No watch? No passage? Murder, murder!
GRATIANO
’Tis some mischance. The voice is very direful.
CASSIO  O, help!
LODOVICO  Hark!
RODERIGO  O wretched villain!
LODOVICO
Two or three groan. ’Tis heavy night.
These may be counterfeits. Let’s think ’t unsafe
To come in to the cry without more help.
RODERIGO
Nobody come? Then shall I bleed to death.
 
Enter Iago with a light.
 
LODOVICO  Hark!
GRATIANO
Here’s one comes in his shirt, with light and
weapons.
IAGO
Who’s there? Whose noise is this that cries on
murder?
LODOVICO
We do not know.
IAGO  Did not you hear a cry?
CASSIO
Here, here! For heaven’s sake, help me!
IAGO  What’s the matter?
GRATIANO, to Lodovico
This is Othello’s ancient, as I take it.
LODOVICO
The same indeed, a very valiant fellow.
IAGO, to Cassio
What are you here that cry so grievously?
CASSIO
Iago? O, I am spoiled, undone by villains.
Give me some help!
IAGO
O me, lieutenant! What villains have done this?
CASSIO
I think that one of them is hereabout
And cannot make away.
IAGO  O treacherous villains!
To Lodovico and Gratiano. What are you there?
Come in, and give some help.
RODERIGO  O, help me here!
CASSIO
That’s one of them.
IAGO, to Roderigo  O murd’rous slave! O villain!
He stabs Roderigo.
RODERIGO
O damned Iago! O inhuman dog!
IAGO
Kill men i’ th’ dark?—Where be these bloody
thieves?
How silent is this town! Ho, murder, murder!—
What may you be? Are you of good or evil?
LODOVICO
As you shall prove us, praise us.
IAGO  Signior Lodovico?
LODOVICO  He, sir.
IAGO
I cry you mercy. Here’s Cassio hurt by villains.
GRATIANO  Cassio?
IAGO
How is ’t, brother?
CASSIO  My leg is cut in two.
IAGO  Marry, heaven forbid!
Light, gentlemen. I’ll bind it with my shirt.
 
Enter Bianca.
 
BIANCA
What is the matter, ho? Who is ’t that cried?
IAGO
Who is ’t that cried?
BIANCA  O, my dear Cassio,
My sweet Cassio! O Cassio, Cassio, Cassio!
IAGO
O notable strumpet! Cassio, may you suspect
Who they should be that have thus mangled you?
CASSIO  No.
GRATIANO
I am sorry to find you thus; I have been to seek you.
IAGO
Lend me a garter. So.—O for a chair
To bear him easily hence!
BIANCA
Alas, he faints. O, Cassio, Cassio, Cassio!
IAGO
Gentlemen all, I do suspect this trash
To be a party in this injury.—
Patience awhile, good Cassio.—Come, come;
Lend me a light. Peering at Roderigo. Know we this
face or no?
Alas, my friend and my dear countryman
Roderigo? No! Yes, sure. O heaven, Roderigo!
GRATIANO  What, of Venice?
IAGO  Even he, sir. Did you know him?
GRATIANO  Know him? Ay.
IAGO
Signior Gratiano? I cry your gentle pardon.
These bloody accidents must excuse my manners
That so neglected you.
GRATIANO  I am glad to see you.
IAGO
How do you, Cassio?—O, a chair, a chair!
GRATIANO  Roderigo?
IAGO
He, he, ’tis he! A chair is brought in. O, that’s well
said; the chair.—
Some good man bear him carefully from hence.
I’ll fetch the General’s surgeon.— For you, mistress,
Save you your labor.—He that lies slain here,
Cassio,
Was my dear friend. What malice was between you?
CASSIO
None in the world. Nor do I know the man.
IAGO, to Bianca
What, look you pale?—O, bear him out o’ th’ air.
Cassio, in the chair, and Roderigo are carried off.
To Gratiano and Lodovico. Stay you, good
gentlemen.—Look you pale, mistress?—
Do you perceive the gastness of her eye?—
Nay, if you stare, we shall hear more anon.—
Behold her well. I pray you, look upon her.
Do you see, gentlemen? Nay, guiltiness will speak
Though tongues were out of use.
 
Enter Emilia.
 
EMILIA
Alas, what is the matter? What is the matter,
husband?
IAGO
Cassio hath here been set on in the dark
By Roderigo and fellows that are scaped.
He’s almost slain, and Roderigo dead.
EMILIA
Alas, good gentleman! Alas, good Cassio!
IAGO
This is the fruits of whoring. Prithee, Emilia,
Go know of Cassio where he supped tonight.
To Bianca. What, do you shake at that?
BIANCA
He supped at my house, but I therefore shake not.
IAGO
O, did he so? I charge you go with me.
EMILIA  O fie upon thee, strumpet!
BIANCA
I am no strumpet, but of life as honest
As you that thus abuse me.
EMILIA  As I? Faugh! Fie upon thee!
IAGO
Kind gentlemen, let’s go see poor Cassio dressed.—
Come, mistress, you must tell ’s another tale.—
Emilia, run you to the citadel
And tell my lord and lady what hath happed.—
Will you go on afore? Aside. This is the night
That either makes me or fordoes me quite.
They exit in different directions.
 
Scene 2
Enter Othello with a light, and Desdemona in her bed.
 
OTHELLO
It is the cause, it is the cause, my soul.
Let me not name it to you, you chaste stars.
It is the cause. Yet I’ll not shed her blood,
Nor scar that whiter skin of hers than snow,
And smooth as monumental alabaster.
Yet she must die, else she’ll betray more men.
Put out the light, and then put out the light.
If I quench thee, thou flaming minister,
I can again thy former light restore
Should I repent me. But once put out thy light,
Thou cunning’st pattern of excelling nature,
I know not where is that Promethean heat
That can thy light relume. When I have plucked the
rose,
I cannot give it vital growth again.
It needs must wither. I’ll smell it on the tree.
O balmy breath, that dost almost persuade
Justice to break her sword! He kisses her. One
more, one more.
Be thus when thou art dead, and I will kill thee
And love thee after. One more, and this the last.
He kisses her.
So sweet was ne’er so fatal. I must weep,
But they are cruel tears. This sorrow’s heavenly:
It strikes where it doth love. She wakes.
DESDEMONA
Who’s there? Othello?
OTHELLO  Ay, Desdemona.
DESDEMONA  Will you come to bed, my lord?
OTHELLO
Have you prayed tonight, Desdemon?
DESDEMONA  Ay, my lord.
OTHELLO
If you bethink yourself of any crime
Unreconciled as yet to heaven and grace,
Solicit for it straight.
DESDEMONA  Alack, my lord,
What may you mean by that?
OTHELLO
Well, do it, and be brief. I will walk by.
I would not kill thy unpreparèd spirit.
No, heaven forfend! I would not kill thy soul.
DESDEMONA  Talk you of killing?
OTHELLO
Ay, I do.
DESDEMONA  Then heaven have mercy on me.
OTHELLO  Amen, with all my heart.
DESDEMONA
If you say so, I hope you will not kill me.
OTHELLO  Humh.
DESDEMONA
And yet I fear you, for you’re fatal then
When your eyes roll so. Why I should fear I know
not,
Since guiltiness I know not, but yet I feel I fear.
OTHELLO
Think on thy sins.
DESDEMONA  They are loves I bear to you.
OTHELLO  Ay, and for that thou diest.
DESDEMONA
That death’s unnatural that kills for loving.
Alas, why gnaw you so your nether lip?
Some bloody passion shakes your very frame.
These are portents, but yet I hope, I hope
They do not point on me.
OTHELLO  Peace, and be still.
DESDEMONA
I will so. What’s the matter?
OTHELLO  That handkerchief
Which I so loved, and gave thee, thou gav’st to
Cassio.
DESDEMONA
No, by my life and soul! Send for the man
And ask him.
OTHELLO
Sweet soul, take heed, take heed of perjury.
Thou art on thy deathbed.
DESDEMONA
Ay, but not yet to die.
OTHELLO  Yes, presently.
Therefore confess thee freely of thy sin.
For to deny each article with oath
Cannot remove nor choke the strong conception
That I do groan withal. Thou art to die.
DESDEMONA
Then Lord have mercy on me!
OTHELLO  I say “Amen.”
DESDEMONA
And have you mercy, too. I never did
Offend you in my life, never loved Cassio
But with such general warranty of heaven
As I might love. I never gave him token.
OTHELLO
By heaven, I saw my handkerchief in ’s hand!
O perjured woman, thou dost stone my heart
And mak’st me call what I intend to do
A murder, which I thought a sacrifice!
I saw the handkerchief!
DESDEMONA  He found it, then.
I never gave it him. Send for him hither.
Let him confess a truth.
OTHELLO  He hath confessed.
DESDEMONA  What, my lord?
OTHELLO
That he hath used thee.
DESDEMONA  How? Unlawfully?
OTHELLO  Ay.
DESDEMONA
He will not say so.
OTHELLO  No. His mouth is stopped.
Honest Iago hath ta’en order for ’t.
DESDEMONA
O, my fear interprets. What, is he dead?
OTHELLO
Had all his hairs been lives, my great revenge
Had stomach for them all.
DESDEMONA
Alas, he is betrayed, and I undone.                                  	
She weeps.
OTHELLO
Out, strumpet! Weep’st thou for him to my face?
DESDEMONA
O banish me, my lord, but kill me not!
OTHELLO  Down, strumpet!
DESDEMONA
Kill me tomorrow, let me live tonight.
OTHELLO  Nay, if you strive—
DESDEMONA
But half an hour!
OTHELLO  Being done, there is no pause.
DESDEMONA
But while I say one prayer!
OTHELLO  It is too late.
He smothers her.
EMILIA, within
My lord, my lord? What ho! My lord, my lord!
OTHELLO
What noise is this?—Not dead? Not yet quite dead?
I that am cruel am yet merciful.
I would not have thee linger in thy pain.
So, so.
EMILIA, within  What, ho! My lord, my lord!
OTHELLO  Who’s
there?
EMILIA, within
O, good my lord, I would speak a word with you.
OTHELLO
Yes. ’Tis Emilia.—By and by.—She’s dead.
’Tis like she comes to speak of Cassio’s death.
The noise was here. Ha, no more moving?
Still as the grave. Shall she come in? Were ’t good?
I think she stirs again. No. What’s best to do?
If she come in, she’ll sure speak to my wife.
My wife, my wife! What wife? I have no wife.
O insupportable! O heavy hour!
Methinks it should be now a huge eclipse
Of sun and moon, and that th’ affrighted globe
Should yawn at alteration.
EMILIA, within  I do beseech you
That I may speak with you. O, good my lord—
OTHELLO
I had forgot thee. O, come in, Emilia.—
Soft, by and by, let me the curtains draw.—
Where art thou?
 
Enter Emilia.
 
What’s the matter with thee now?
EMILIA
O, my good lord, yonder’s foul murders done.
OTHELLO  What? Now?
EMILIA  But now, my lord.
OTHELLO
It is the very error of the moon.
She comes more nearer Earth than she was wont
And makes men mad.
EMILIA  Cassio, my lord, hath killed
A young Venetian called Roderigo.
OTHELLO
Roderigo killed? And Cassio killed?
EMILIA  No, Cassio is not killed.
OTHELLO
Not Cassio killed? Then murder’s out of tune,
And sweet revenge grows harsh.
DESDEMONA  O falsely, falsely murdered.
EMILIA
O Lord, what cry is that?
OTHELLO  That? What?
EMILIA
Out, and alas, that was my lady’s voice!
Help! Help ho! Help! O lady, speak again!
Sweet Desdemona, O sweet mistress, speak!
DESDEMONA  A guiltless death I die.
EMILIA  O, who hath done this deed?
DESDEMONA  Nobody. I myself. Farewell.
Commend me to my kind lord. O, farewell.
She dies.
OTHELLO
Why, how should she be murdered?
EMILIA  Alas, who
knows?
OTHELLO
You heard her say herself, it was not I.
EMILIA
She said so. I must needs report the truth.
OTHELLO
She’s like a liar gone to burning hell!
’Twas I that killed her.
EMILIA
O, the more angel she, and you the blacker devil!
OTHELLO
She turned to folly, and she was a whore.
EMILIA
Thou dost belie her, and thou art a devil!
OTHELLO  She was false as water.
EMILIA  Thou art rash as fire to say
That she was false. O, she was heavenly true!
OTHELLO
Cassio did top her. Ask thy husband else.
O, I were damned beneath all depth in hell
But that I did proceed upon just grounds
To this extremity. Thy husband knew it all.
EMILIA  My husband?
OTHELLO  Thy husband.
EMILIA  That she was false to wedlock?
OTHELLO
Ay, with Cassio. Had she been true,
If heaven would make me such another world
Of one entire and perfect chrysolite,
I’d not have sold her for it.
EMILIA  My husband?
OTHELLO
Ay, ’twas he that told me on her first.
An honest man he is, and hates the slime
That sticks on filthy deeds.
EMILIA  My husband?
OTHELLO
What needs this iterance, woman? I say, thy
husband.
EMILIA
O mistress, villainy hath made mocks with love!—
My husband say she was false?
OTHELLO  He, woman.
I say thy husband. Dost understand the word?
My friend, thy husband; honest, honest Iago.
EMILIA
If he say so, may his pernicious soul
Rot half a grain a day! He lies to th’ heart!
She was too fond of her most filthy bargain.
He draws his sword.
OTHELLO  Hah?
EMILIA  Do thy worst!
This deed of thine is no more worthy heaven
Than thou wast worthy her.
OTHELLO  Peace, you were best!
EMILIA
Thou hast not half that power to do me harm
As I have to be hurt. O gull! O dolt,
As ignorant as dirt! Thou hast done a deed—
I care not for thy sword. I’ll make thee known,
Though I lost twenty lives. Help! Help, ho! Help!
The Moor hath killed my mistress! Murder, murder!
 
Enter Montano, Gratiano, and Iago.
 
MONTANO
What is the matter? How now, general?
EMILIA
O, are you come, Iago? You have done well,
That men must lay their murders on your neck.
GRATIANO  What is the matter?
EMILIA, to Iago
Disprove this villain, if thou be’st a man.
He says thou told’st him that his wife was false.
I know thou didst not. Thou ’rt not such a villain.
Speak, for my heart is full.
IAGO
I told him what I thought, and told no more
Than what he found himself was apt and true.
EMILIA
But did you ever tell him she was false?
IAGO  I did.
EMILIA
You told a lie, an odious, damnèd lie!
Upon my soul, a lie, a wicked lie!
She false with Cassio? Did you say with Cassio?
IAGO
With Cassio, mistress. Go to! Charm your tongue.
EMILIA
I will not charm my tongue. I am bound to speak.
My mistress here lies murdered in her bed.
ALL  O heavens forfend!
EMILIA, to Iago
And your reports have set the murder on!
OTHELLO
Nay, stare not, masters; it is true indeed.
GRATIANO  ’Tis a strange truth.
MONTANO
O monstrous act!
EMILIA  Villainy, villainy, villainy!
I think upon ’t, I think! I smell ’t! O villainy!
I thought so then. I’ll kill myself for grief!
O villainy! Villainy!
IAGO
What, are you mad? I charge you get you home.
EMILIA
Good gentlemen, let me have leave to speak.
’Tis proper I obey him, but not now.
Perchance, Iago, I will ne’er go home.
OTHELLO
O, O, O!                                                       	
Othello falls on the bed.
EMILIA  Nay, lay thee down, and roar!
For thou hast killed the sweetest innocent
That e’er did lift up eye.
OTHELLO, standing  O, she was foul!—
I scarce did know you, uncle. There lies your niece,
Whose breath indeed these hands have newly
stopped.
I know this act shows horrible and grim.
GRATIANO
Poor Desdemon, I am glad thy father’s dead.
Thy match was mortal to him, and pure grief
Shore his old thread in twain. Did he live now,
This sight would make him do a desperate turn,
Yea, curse his better angel from his side,
And fall to reprobance.
OTHELLO
’Tis pitiful. But yet Iago knows
That she with Cassio hath the act of shame
A thousand times committed. Cassio confessed it,
And she did gratify his amorous works
With that recognizance and pledge of love
Which I first gave her. I saw it in his hand.
It was a handkerchief, an antique token
My father gave my mother.
EMILIA  O God! O heavenly God!
IAGO
Zounds, hold your peace!
EMILIA  ’Twill out, ’twill out. I peace?
No, I will speak as liberal as the north.
Let heaven and men and devils, let them all,
All, all, cry shame against me, yet I’ll speak.
IAGO  Be wise, and get you home.
He draws his sword.
EMILIA
I will not.
GRATIANO  Fie, your sword upon a woman!
EMILIA
O thou dull Moor, that handkerchief thou speak’st
of
I found by fortune, and did give my husband—
For often, with a solemn earnestness
(More than indeed belonged to such a trifle),
He begged of me to steal ’t.
IAGO  Villainous whore!
EMILIA
She give it Cassio? No, alas, I found it,
And I did give ’t my husband.
IAGO  Filth, thou liest!
EMILIA
By heaven, I do not, I do not, gentlemen!
To Othello. O murd’rous coxcomb, what should
such a fool
Do with so good a wife?
OTHELLO  Are there no stones in heaven
But what serves for the thunder?—Precious villain!
The Moor runs at Iago but is disarmed.
Iago kills his wife.
GRATIANO
The woman falls! Sure he hath killed his wife.
EMILIA
Ay, ay! O, lay me by my mistress’ side.                          	
Iago exits.
GRATIANO  He’s gone, but his wife’s killed.
MONTANO
’Tis a notorious villain. Take you this weapon
Which I have here recovered from the Moor.
Come, guard the door without. Let him not pass,
But kill him rather. I’ll after that same villain,
For ’tis a damnèd slave.
Montano and Gratiano exit.
OTHELLO  I am not valiant neither,
But every puny whipster gets my sword.
But why should honor outlive honesty?
Let it go all.
EMILIA  What did thy song bode, lady?
Hark, canst thou hear me? I will play the swan
And die in music.
She sings.    	Willow, willow, willow.
Moor, she was chaste. She loved thee, cruel Moor.
So come my soul to bliss, as I speak true.
So speaking as I think, alas, I die.                                       	
She dies.
OTHELLO
I have another weapon in this chamber.
It is a sword of Spain, the ice brook’s temper.
O, here it is.—Uncle, I must come forth.
GRATIANO, within
If thou attempt it, it will cost thee dear;
Thou hast no weapon and perforce must suffer.
OTHELLO
Look in upon me, then, and speak with me,
Or naked as I am I will assault thee.
 
Enter Gratiano.
 
GRATIANO
What is the matter?
OTHELLO  Behold, I have a weapon.
A better never did itself sustain
Upon a soldier’s thigh. I have seen the day
That with this little arm and this good sword
I have made my way through more impediments
Than twenty times your stop. But—O vain boast!—
Who can control his fate? ’Tis not so now.
Be not afraid, though you do see me weaponed.
Here is my journey’s end, here is my butt
And very sea-mark of my utmost sail.
Do you go back dismayed? ’Tis a lost fear.
Man but a rush against Othello’s breast,
And he retires. Where should Othello go?
He looks toward the bed.
Now, how dost thou look now? O ill-starred wench,
Pale as thy smock, when we shall meet at compt,
This look of thine will hurl my soul from heaven,
And fiends will snatch at it. Cold, cold, my girl?
Even like thy chastity.—O cursèd, cursèd slave!—
Whip me, you devils,
From the possession of this heavenly sight!
Blow me about in winds, roast me in sulfur,
Wash me in steep-down gulfs of liquid fire!
O Desdemon! Dead, Desdemon! Dead! O, O!
 
 Enter Lodovico, Cassio in a chair, Montano, and Iago,
with Officers.
 
LODOVICO
Where is this rash and most unfortunate man?
OTHELLO
That’s he that was Othello. Here I am.
LODOVICO
Where is that viper? Bring the villain forth.
Iago is brought forward.
OTHELLO
I look down towards his feet; but that’s a fable.—
If that thou be’st a devil, I cannot kill thee.
He stabs Iago.
LODOVICO
Wrench his sword from him.
Othello is disarmed.
IAGO  I bleed, sir, but not killed.
OTHELLO
I am not sorry neither. I’d have thee live,
For in my sense ’tis happiness to die.
LODOVICO
O thou Othello, that wert once so good,
Fall’n in the practice of a damnèd slave,
What shall be said to thee?
OTHELLO  Why, anything.
An honorable murderer, if you will,
For naught I did in hate, but all in honor.
LODOVICO
This wretch hath part confessed his villainy.
Did you and he consent in Cassio’s death?
OTHELLO  Ay.
CASSIO
Dear general, I never gave you cause.
OTHELLO
I do believe it, and I ask your pardon.
Will you, I pray, demand that demi-devil
Why he hath thus ensnared my soul and body?
IAGO
Demand me nothing. What you know, you know.
From this time forth I never will speak word.
LODOVICO  What? Not to pray?
GRATIANO  Torments will ope your lips.
OTHELLO  Well, thou dost best.
LODOVICO  Sir,
You shall understand what hath befall’n,
Which, as I think, you know not. Here is a letter
Found in the pocket of the slain Roderigo,
And here another. He shows papers. The one of
them imports
The death of Cassio, to be undertook
By Roderigo.
OTHELLO
O villain!
CASSIO  Most heathenish and most gross.
LODOVICO
Now here’s another discontented paper
Found in his pocket, too; and this it seems
Roderigo meant t’ have sent this damnèd villain,
But that, belike, Iago in the interim
Came in and satisfied him.
OTHELLO  O, thou pernicious caitiff!—
How came you, Cassio, by that handkerchief
That was my wife’s?
CASSIO  I found it in my chamber.
And he himself confessed it but even now,
That there he dropped it for a special purpose
Which wrought to his desire.
OTHELLO  O fool, fool, fool!
CASSIO
There is besides, in Roderigo’s letter,
How he upbraids Iago, that he made him
Brave me upon the watch, whereon it came
That I was cast. And even but now he spake,
After long seeming dead: Iago hurt him,
Iago set him on.
LODOVICO, to Othello
You must forsake this room and go with us.
Your power and your command is taken off,
And Cassio rules in Cyprus. For this slave,
If there be any cunning cruelty
That can torment him much and hold him long,
It shall be his. You shall close prisoner rest,
Till that the nature of your fault be known
To the Venetian state.—Come, bring away.
OTHELLO
Soft you. A word or two before you go.
I have done the state some service, and they
know ’t.
No more of that. I pray you in your letters,
When you shall these unlucky deeds relate,
Speak of me as I am. Nothing extenuate,
Nor set down aught in malice. Then must you speak
Of one that loved not wisely, but too well;
Of one not easily jealous, but being wrought,
Perplexed in the extreme; of one whose hand,
Like the base Judean, threw a pearl away
Richer than all his tribe; of one whose subdued
eyes,
Albeit unused to the melting mood,
Drops tears as fast as the Arabian trees
Their medicinable gum. Set you down this.
And say besides, that in Aleppo once,
Where a malignant and a turbanned Turk
Beat a Venetian and traduced the state,
I took by th’ throat the circumcisèd dog,
And smote him, thus.                                              	
He stabs himself.
LODOVICO  O bloody period!
GRATIANO  All that is spoke is marred.
OTHELLO, to Desdemona
I kissed thee ere I killed thee. No way but this,
Killing myself, to die upon a kiss.                                        	
He dies.
CASSIO
This did I fear, but thought he had no weapon,
For he was great of heart.
LODOVICO, to Iago  O Spartan dog,
More fell than anguish, hunger, or the sea,
Look on the tragic loading of this bed.
This is thy work.—The object poisons sight.
Let it be hid.—Gratiano, keep the house,
And seize upon the fortunes of the Moor,
For they succeed on you. To Cassio. To you, lord
governor,
Remains the censure of this hellish villain.
The time, the place, the torture, O, enforce it.
Myself will straight aboard, and to the state
This heavy act with heavy heart relate.
They exit.
 

Macbeth
 
 
ACT 1
 
Scene 1
Thunder and Lightning. Enter three Witches.
 
FIRST WITCH
When shall we three meet again?
In thunder, lightning, or in rain?
SECOND WITCH
When the hurly-burly’s done,
When the battle’s lost and won.
THIRD WITCH
That will be ere the set of sun.
FIRST WITCH
Where the place?
SECOND WITCH  Upon the heath.
THIRD WITCH
There to meet with Macbeth.
FIRST WITCH  I come, Graymalkin.
SECOND WITCH  Paddock calls.
THIRD WITCH  Anon.
ALL
Fair is foul, and foul is fair;
Hover through the fog and filthy air.
They exit.
 
Scene 2
Alarum within. Enter King Duncan, Malcolm,
Donalbain, Lennox, with Attendants, meeting a bleeding
Captain.
 
DUNCAN
What bloody man is that? He can report,
As seemeth by his plight, of the revolt
The newest state.
MALCOLM  This is the sergeant
Who, like a good and hardy soldier, fought
’Gainst my captivity.—Hail, brave friend!
Say to the King the knowledge of the broil
As thou didst leave it.
CAPTAIN  Doubtful it stood,
As two spent swimmers that do cling together
And choke their art. The merciless Macdonwald
(Worthy to be a rebel, for to that
The multiplying villainies of nature
Do swarm upon him) from the Western Isles
Of kerns and gallowglasses is supplied;
And Fortune, on his damnèd quarrel smiling,
Showed like a rebel’s whore. But all’s too weak;
For brave Macbeth (well he deserves that name),
Disdaining Fortune, with his brandished steel,
Which smoked with bloody execution,
Like Valor’s minion, carved out his passage
Till he faced the slave;
Which ne’er shook hands, nor bade farewell to him,
Till he unseamed him from the nave to th’ chops,
And fixed his head upon our battlements.
DUNCAN
O valiant cousin, worthy gentleman!
CAPTAIN
As whence the sun ’gins his reflection
Shipwracking storms and direful thunders break,
So from that spring whence comfort seemed to
come
Discomfort swells. Mark, King of Scotland, mark:
No sooner justice had, with valor armed,
Compelled these skipping kerns to trust their heels,
But the Norweyan lord, surveying vantage,
With furbished arms and new supplies of men,
Began a fresh assault.
DUNCAN
Dismayed not this our captains, Macbeth and
Banquo?
CAPTAIN
Yes, as sparrows eagles, or the hare the lion.
If I say sooth, I must report they were
As cannons overcharged with double cracks,
So they doubly redoubled strokes upon the foe.
Except they meant to bathe in reeking wounds
Or memorize another Golgotha,
I cannot tell—
But I am faint. My gashes cry for help.
DUNCAN
So well thy words become thee as thy wounds:
They smack of honor both.—Go, get him surgeons.
The Captain is led off by Attendants.
 
Enter Ross and Angus.
 
Who comes here?
MALCOLM  The worthy Thane of Ross.
LENNOX
What a haste looks through his eyes!
So should he look that seems to speak things
strange.
ROSS  God save the King.
DUNCAN  Whence cam’st thou, worthy thane?
ROSS  From Fife, great king,
Where the Norweyan banners flout the sky
And fan our people cold.
Norway himself, with terrible numbers,
Assisted by that most disloyal traitor,
The Thane of Cawdor, began a dismal conflict,
Till that Bellona’s bridegroom, lapped in proof,
Confronted him with self-comparisons,
Point against point, rebellious arm ’gainst arm,
Curbing his lavish spirit. And to conclude,
The victory fell on us.
DUNCAN  Great happiness!
ROSS  That now Sweno,
The Norways’ king, craves composition.
Nor would we deign him burial of his men
Till he disbursèd at Saint Colme’s Inch
Ten thousand dollars to our general use.
DUNCAN
No more that Thane of Cawdor shall deceive
Our bosom interest. Go, pronounce his present
death,
And with his former title greet Macbeth.
ROSS  I’ll see it done.
DUNCAN
What he hath lost, noble Macbeth hath won.
They exit.
 
Scene 3
Thunder. Enter the three Witches.
 
FIRST WITCH  Where hast thou been, sister?
SECOND WITCH  Killing swine.
THIRD WITCH  Sister, where thou?
FIRST WITCH
A sailor’s wife had chestnuts in her lap
And munched and munched and munched. “Give
me,” quoth I.
“Aroint thee, witch,” the rump-fed runnion cries.
Her husband’s to Aleppo gone, master o’ th’ Tiger;
But in a sieve I’ll thither sail,
And, like a rat without a tail,
I’ll do, I’ll do, and I’ll do.
SECOND WITCH
I’ll give thee a wind.
FIRST WITCH
Th’ art kind.
THIRD WITCH
And I another.
FIRST WITCH
I myself have all the other,
And the very ports they blow;
All the quarters that they know
I’ th’ shipman’s card.
I’ll drain him dry as hay.
Sleep shall neither night nor day
Hang upon his penthouse lid.
He shall live a man forbid.
Weary sev’nnights, nine times nine,
Shall he dwindle, peak, and pine.
Though his bark cannot be lost,
Yet it shall be tempest-tossed.
Look what I have.
SECOND WITCH  Show me, show me.
FIRST WITCH
Here I have a pilot’s thumb,
Wracked as homeward he did come.                           	
Drum within.
THIRD WITCH
A drum, a drum!
Macbeth doth come.
ALL, dancing in a circle
The Weïrd Sisters, hand in hand,
Posters of the sea and land,
Thus do go about, about,
Thrice to thine and thrice to mine
And thrice again, to make up nine.
Peace, the charm’s wound up.
 
Enter Macbeth and Banquo.
 
MACBETH
So foul and fair a day I have not seen.
BANQUO
How far is ’t called to Forres?—What are these,
So withered, and so wild in their attire,
That look not like th’ inhabitants o’ th’ Earth
And yet are on ’t?—Live you? Or are you aught
That man may question? You seem to understand
me
By each at once her choppy finger laying
Upon her skinny lips. You should be women,
And yet your beards forbid me to interpret
That you are so.
MACBETH  Speak if you can. What are you?
FIRST WITCH
All hail, Macbeth! Hail to thee, Thane of Glamis!
SECOND WITCH
All hail, Macbeth! Hail to thee, Thane of Cawdor!
THIRD WITCH
All hail, Macbeth, that shalt be king hereafter!
BANQUO
Good sir, why do you start and seem to fear
Things that do sound so fair?—I’ th’ name of truth,
Are you fantastical, or that indeed
Which outwardly you show? My noble partner
You greet with present grace and great prediction
Of noble having and of royal hope,
That he seems rapt withal. To me you speak not.
If you can look into the seeds of time
And say which grain will grow and which will not,
Speak, then, to me, who neither beg nor fear
Your favors nor your hate.
FIRST WITCH  Hail!
SECOND WITCH  Hail!
THIRD WITCH  Hail!
FIRST WITCH
Lesser than Macbeth and greater.
SECOND WITCH
Not so happy, yet much happier.
THIRD WITCH
Thou shalt get kings, though thou be none.
So all hail, Macbeth and Banquo!
FIRST WITCH
Banquo and Macbeth, all hail!
MACBETH
Stay, you imperfect speakers. Tell me more.
By Sinel’s death I know I am Thane of Glamis.
But how of Cawdor? The Thane of Cawdor lives
A prosperous gentleman, and to be king
Stands not within the prospect of belief,
No more than to be Cawdor. Say from whence
You owe this strange intelligence or why
Upon this blasted heath you stop our way
With such prophetic greeting. Speak, I charge you.
Witches vanish.
BANQUO
The earth hath bubbles, as the water has,
And these are of them. Whither are they vanished?
MACBETH
Into the air, and what seemed corporal melted,
As breath into the wind. Would they had stayed!
BANQUO
Were such things here as we do speak about?
Or have we eaten on the insane root
That takes the reason prisoner?
MACBETH
Your children shall be kings.
BANQUO  You shall be king.
MACBETH
And Thane of Cawdor too. Went it not so?
BANQUO
To th’ selfsame tune and words.—Who’s here?
 
Enter Ross and Angus.
 
ROSS
The King hath happily received, Macbeth,
The news of thy success, and, when he reads
Thy personal venture in the rebels’ fight,
His wonders and his praises do contend
Which should be thine or his. Silenced with that,
In viewing o’er the rest o’ th’ selfsame day
He finds thee in the stout Norweyan ranks,
Nothing afeard of what thyself didst make,
Strange images of death. As thick as tale
Came post with post, and every one did bear
Thy praises in his kingdom’s great defense,
And poured them down before him.
ANGUS  We are sent
To give thee from our royal master thanks,
Only to herald thee into his sight,
Not pay thee.
ROSS
And for an earnest of a greater honor,
He bade me, from him, call thee Thane of Cawdor,
In which addition, hail, most worthy thane,
For it is thine.
BANQUO  What, can the devil speak true?
MACBETH
The Thane of Cawdor lives. Why do you dress me
In borrowed robes?
ANGUS  Who was the Thane lives yet,
But under heavy judgment bears that life
Which he deserves to lose. Whether he was
combined
With those of Norway, or did line the rebel
With hidden help and vantage, or that with both
He labored in his country’s wrack, I know not;
But treasons capital, confessed and proved,
Have overthrown him.
MACBETH, aside  Glamis and Thane of Cawdor!
The greatest is behind. To Ross and Angus. Thanks
for your pains.
Aside to Banquo. Do you not hope your children
shall be kings,
When those that gave the Thane of Cawdor to me
Promised no less to them?
BANQUO  That, trusted home,
Might yet enkindle you unto the crown,
Besides the Thane of Cawdor. But ’tis strange.
And oftentimes, to win us to our harm,
The instruments of darkness tell us truths,
Win us with honest trifles, to betray ’s
In deepest consequence.—
Cousins, a word, I pray you.                                    	
They step aside.
MACBETH, aside  Two truths are told
As happy prologues to the swelling act
Of the imperial theme.—I thank you, gentlemen.
Aside. This supernatural soliciting
Cannot be ill, cannot be good. If ill,
Why hath it given me earnest of success
Commencing in a truth? I am Thane of Cawdor.
If good, why do I yield to that suggestion
Whose horrid image doth unfix my hair
And make my seated heart knock at my ribs
Against the use of nature? Present fears
Are less than horrible imaginings.
My thought, whose murder yet is but fantastical,
Shakes so my single state of man
That function is smothered in surmise,
And nothing is but what is not.
BANQUO  Look how our partner’s rapt.
MACBETH, aside
If chance will have me king, why, chance may
crown me
Without my stir.
BANQUO  New honors come upon him,
Like our strange garments, cleave not to their mold
But with the aid of use.
MACBETH, aside  Come what come may,
Time and the hour runs through the roughest day.
BANQUO
Worthy Macbeth, we stay upon your leisure.
MACBETH
Give me your favor. My dull brain was wrought
With things forgotten. Kind gentlemen, your pains
Are registered where every day I turn
The leaf to read them. Let us toward the King.
Aside to Banquo. Think upon what hath chanced,
and at more time,
The interim having weighed it, let us speak
Our free hearts each to other.
BANQUO  Very gladly.
MACBETH  Till then, enough.—Come, friends.
They exit.
 
Scene 4
Flourish. Enter King Duncan, Lennox, Malcolm,
Donalbain, and Attendants.
 
DUNCAN
Is execution done on Cawdor? Are not
Those in commission yet returned?
MALCOLM  My liege,
They are not yet come back. But I have spoke
With one that saw him die, who did report
That very frankly he confessed his treasons,
Implored your Highness’ pardon, and set forth
A deep repentance. Nothing in his life
Became him like the leaving it. He died
As one that had been studied in his death
To throw away the dearest thing he owed
As ’twere a careless trifle.
DUNCAN  There’s no art
To find the mind’s construction in the face.
He was a gentleman on whom I built
An absolute trust.
 
Enter Macbeth, Banquo, Ross, and Angus.
 
O worthiest cousin,
The sin of my ingratitude even now
Was heavy on me. Thou art so far before
That swiftest wing of recompense is slow
To overtake thee. Would thou hadst less deserved,
That the proportion both of thanks and payment
Might have been mine! Only I have left to say,
More is thy due than more than all can pay.
MACBETH
The service and the loyalty I owe
In doing it pays itself. Your Highness’ part
Is to receive our duties, and our duties
Are to your throne and state children and servants,
Which do but what they should by doing everything
Safe toward your love and honor.
DUNCAN  Welcome hither.
I have begun to plant thee and will labor
To make thee full of growing.—Noble Banquo,
That hast no less deserved nor must be known
No less to have done so, let me enfold thee
And hold thee to my heart.
BANQUO  There, if I grow,
The harvest is your own.
DUNCAN  My plenteous joys,
Wanton in fullness, seek to hide themselves
In drops of sorrow.—Sons, kinsmen, thanes,
And you whose places are the nearest, know
We will establish our estate upon
Our eldest, Malcolm, whom we name hereafter
The Prince of Cumberland; which honor must
Not unaccompanied invest him only,
But signs of nobleness, like stars, shall shine
On all deservers.—From hence to Inverness
And bind us further to you.
MACBETH
The rest is labor which is not used for you.
I’ll be myself the harbinger and make joyful
The hearing of my wife with your approach.
So humbly take my leave.
DUNCAN  My worthy Cawdor.
MACBETH, aside
The Prince of Cumberland! That is a step
On which I must fall down or else o’erleap,
For in my way it lies. Stars, hide your fires;
Let not light see my black and deep desires.
The eye wink at the hand, yet let that be
Which the eye fears, when it is done, to see.
He exits.
DUNCAN
True, worthy Banquo. He is full so valiant,
And in his commendations I am fed:
It is a banquet to me.—Let’s after him,
Whose care is gone before to bid us welcome.
It is a peerless kinsman.
Flourish. They exit.
 
Scene 5
Enter Macbeth’s Wife, alone, with a letter.
 
LADY MACBETH, reading the letter  They met me in the
day of success, and I have learned by the perfect’st
report they have more in them than mortal knowledge.
When I burned in desire to question them further, they
made themselves air, into which they vanished.
Whiles I stood rapt in the wonder of it came missives
from the King, who all-hailed me “Thane of Cawdor,”
by which title, before, these Weïrd Sisters saluted me
and referred me to the coming on of time with “Hail,
king that shalt be.” This have I thought good to deliver
thee, my dearest partner of greatness, that thou
might’st not lose the dues of rejoicing by being ignorant
of what greatness is promised thee. Lay it to thy
heart, and farewell.
Glamis thou art, and Cawdor, and shalt be
What thou art promised. Yet do I fear thy nature;
It is too full o’ th’ milk of human kindness
To catch the nearest way. Thou wouldst be great,
Art not without ambition, but without
The illness should attend it. What thou wouldst
highly,
That wouldst thou holily; wouldst not play false
And yet wouldst wrongly win. Thou ’dst have, great
Glamis,
That which cries “Thus thou must do,” if thou have
it,
And that which rather thou dost fear to do,
Than wishest should be undone. Hie thee hither,
That I may pour my spirits in thine ear
And chastise with the valor of my tongue
All that impedes thee from the golden round,
Which fate and metaphysical aid doth seem
To have thee crowned withal.
 
Enter Messenger.
 
What is your tidings?
MESSENGER
The King comes here tonight.
LADY MACBETH  Thou ’rt mad to say it.
Is not thy master with him, who, were ’t so,
Would have informed for preparation?
MESSENGER
So please you, it is true. Our thane is coming.
One of my fellows had the speed of him,
Who, almost dead for breath, had scarcely more
Than would make up his message.
LADY MACBETH  Give him tending.
He brings great news.                                              	
Messenger exits.
The raven himself is hoarse
That croaks the fatal entrance of Duncan
Under my battlements. Come, you spirits
That tend on mortal thoughts, unsex me here,
And fill me from the crown to the toe top-full
Of direst cruelty. Make thick my blood.
Stop up th’ access and passage to remorse,
That no compunctious visitings of nature
Shake my fell purpose, nor keep peace between
Th’ effect and it. Come to my woman’s breasts
And take my milk for gall, you murd’ring ministers,
Wherever in your sightless substances
You wait on nature’s mischief. Come, thick night,
And pall thee in the dunnest smoke of hell,
That my keen knife see not the wound it makes,
Nor heaven peep through the blanket of the dark
To cry “Hold, hold!”
 
Enter Macbeth.
 
Great Glamis, worthy Cawdor,
Greater than both by the all-hail hereafter!
Thy letters have transported me beyond
This ignorant present, and I feel now
The future in the instant.
MACBETH  My dearest love,
Duncan comes here tonight.
LADY MACBETH  And when goes hence?
MACBETH
Tomorrow, as he purposes.
LADY MACBETH  O, never
Shall sun that morrow see!
Your face, my thane, is as a book where men
May read strange matters. To beguile the time,
Look like the time. Bear welcome in your eye,
Your hand, your tongue. Look like th’ innocent
flower,
But be the serpent under ’t. He that’s coming
Must be provided for; and you shall put
This night’s great business into my dispatch,
Which shall to all our nights and days to come
Give solely sovereign sway and masterdom.
MACBETH
We will speak further.
LADY MACBETH  Only look up clear.
To alter favor ever is to fear.
Leave all the rest to me.
They exit.
 
Scene 6
Hautboys and Torches. Enter King Duncan, Malcolm,
Donalbain, Banquo, Lennox, Macduff, Ross, Angus, and
Attendants.
 
DUNCAN
This castle hath a pleasant seat. The air
Nimbly and sweetly recommends itself
Unto our gentle senses.
BANQUO  This guest of summer,
The temple-haunting martlet, does approve,
By his loved mansionry, that the heaven’s breath
Smells wooingly here. No jutty, frieze,
Buttress, nor coign of vantage, but this bird
Hath made his pendant bed and procreant cradle.
Where they most breed and haunt, I have
observed,
The air is delicate.
 
Enter Lady Macbeth.
 
DUNCAN  See, see our honored hostess!—
The love that follows us sometime is our trouble,
Which still we thank as love. Herein I teach you
How you shall bid God ’ild us for your pains
And thank us for your trouble.
LADY MACBETH  All our service,
In every point twice done and then done double,
Were poor and single business to contend
Against those honors deep and broad wherewith
Your Majesty loads our house. For those of old,
And the late dignities heaped up to them,
We rest your hermits.
DUNCAN  Where’s the Thane of Cawdor?
We coursed him at the heels and had a purpose
To be his purveyor; but he rides well,
And his great love, sharp as his spur, hath helped
him
To his home before us. Fair and noble hostess,
We are your guest tonight.
LADY MACBETH  Your servants ever
Have theirs, themselves, and what is theirs in compt
To make their audit at your Highness’ pleasure,
Still to return your own.
DUNCAN  Give me your hand.
 
Taking her hand.
Conduct me to mine host. We love him highly
And shall continue our graces towards him.
By your leave, hostess.
They exit.
 
Scene 7
Hautboys. Torches. Enter a Sewer and divers Servants
with dishes and service over the stage. Then enter
Macbeth.
 
MACBETH
If it were done when ’tis done, then ’twere well
It were done quickly. If th’ assassination
Could trammel up the consequence and catch
With his surcease success, that but this blow
Might be the be-all and the end-all here,
But here, upon this bank and shoal of time,
We’d jump the life to come. But in these cases
We still have judgment here, that we but teach
Bloody instructions, which, being taught, return
To plague th’ inventor. This even-handed justice
Commends th’ ingredience of our poisoned chalice
To our own lips. He’s here in double trust:
First, as I am his kinsman and his subject,
Strong both against the deed; then, as his host,
Who should against his murderer shut the door,
Not bear the knife myself. Besides, this Duncan
Hath borne his faculties so meek, hath been
So clear in his great office, that his virtues
Will plead like angels, trumpet-tongued, against
The deep damnation of his taking-off;
And pity, like a naked newborn babe
Striding the blast, or heaven’s cherubin horsed
Upon the sightless couriers of the air,
Shall blow the horrid deed in every eye,
That tears shall drown the wind. I have no spur
To prick the sides of my intent, but only
Vaulting ambition, which o’erleaps itself
And falls on th’ other—
 
Enter Lady Macbeth.
 
How now, what news?
LADY MACBETH
He has almost supped. Why have you left the
chamber?
MACBETH
Hath he asked for me?
LADY MACBETH  Know you not he has?
MACBETH
We will proceed no further in this business.
He hath honored me of late, and I have bought
Golden opinions from all sorts of people,
Which would be worn now in their newest gloss,
Not cast aside so soon.
LADY MACBETH  Was the hope drunk
Wherein you dressed yourself? Hath it slept since?
And wakes it now, to look so green and pale
At what it did so freely? From this time
Such I account thy love. Art thou afeard
To be the same in thine own act and valor
As thou art in desire? Wouldst thou have that
Which thou esteem’st the ornament of life
And live a coward in thine own esteem,
Letting “I dare not” wait upon “I would,”
Like the poor cat i’ th’ adage?
MACBETH  Prithee, peace.
I dare do all that may become a man.
Who dares do more is none.
LADY MACBETH  What beast was ’t,
then,
That made you break this enterprise to me?
When you durst do it, then you were a man;
And to be more than what you were, you would
Be so much more the man. Nor time nor place
Did then adhere, and yet you would make both.
They have made themselves, and that their fitness
now
Does unmake you. I have given suck, and know
How tender ’tis to love the babe that milks me.
I would, while it was smiling in my face,
Have plucked my nipple from his boneless gums
And dashed the brains out, had I so sworn as you
Have done to this.
MACBETH  If we should fail—
LADY MACBETH  We fail?
But screw your courage to the sticking place
And we’ll not fail. When Duncan is asleep
(Whereto the rather shall his day’s hard journey
Soundly invite him), his two chamberlains
Will I with wine and wassail so convince
That memory, the warder of the brain,
Shall be a fume, and the receipt of reason
A limbeck only. When in swinish sleep
Their drenchèd natures lies as in a death,
What cannot you and I perform upon
Th’ unguarded Duncan? What not put upon
His spongy officers, who shall bear the guilt
Of our great quell?
MACBETH  Bring forth men-children only,
For thy undaunted mettle should compose
Nothing but males. Will it not be received,
When we have marked with blood those sleepy two
Of his own chamber and used their very daggers,
That they have done ’t?
LADY MACBETH  Who dares receive it other,
As we shall make our griefs and clamor roar
Upon his death?
MACBETH  I am settled and bend up
Each corporal agent to this terrible feat.
Away, and mock the time with fairest show.
False face must hide what the false heart doth
know.
They exit.
 
 
 

 
 
ACT 2
 
Scene 1
Enter Banquo, and Fleance with a torch before him.
 
BANQUO  How goes the night, boy?
FLEANCE
The moon is down. I have not heard the clock.
BANQUO  And she goes down at twelve.
FLEANCE  I take ’t ’tis later, sir.
BANQUO
Hold, take my sword.                      	
He gives his sword to Fleance.
There’s husbandry in heaven;
Their candles are all out. Take thee that too.
A heavy summons lies like lead upon me,
And yet I would not sleep. Merciful powers,
Restrain in me the cursèd thoughts that nature
Gives way to in repose.
 
Enter Macbeth, and a Servant with a torch.
 
Give me my sword.—Who’s
there?
MACBETH  A friend.
BANQUO
What, sir, not yet at rest? The King’s abed.
He hath been in unusual pleasure, and
Sent forth great largess to your offices.
This diamond he greets your wife withal,
By the name of most kind hostess, and shut up
In measureless content.
He gives Macbeth a jewel.
MACBETH  Being unprepared,
Our will became the servant to defect,
Which else should free have wrought.
BANQUO  All’s well.
I dreamt last night of the three Weïrd Sisters.
To you they have showed some truth.
MACBETH  I think not of
them.
Yet, when we can entreat an hour to serve,
We would spend it in some words upon that
business,
If you would grant the time.
BANQUO  At your kind’st leisure.
MACBETH
If you shall cleave to my consent, when ’tis,
It shall make honor for you.
BANQUO  So I lose none
In seeking to augment it, but still keep
My bosom franchised and allegiance clear,
I shall be counseled.
MACBETH  Good repose the while.
BANQUO  Thanks, sir. The like to you.
Banquo and Fleance exit.
MACBETH
Go bid thy mistress, when my drink is ready,
She strike upon the bell. Get thee to bed.
Servant exits.
Is this a dagger which I see before me,
The handle toward my hand? Come, let me clutch
thee.
I have thee not, and yet I see thee still.
Art thou not, fatal vision, sensible
To feeling as to sight? Or art thou but
A dagger of the mind, a false creation
Proceeding from the heat-oppressèd brain?
I see thee yet, in form as palpable
As this which now I draw.                              	
He draws his dagger.
Thou marshal’st me the way that I was going,
And such an instrument I was to use.
Mine eyes are made the fools o’ th’ other senses
Or else worth all the rest. I see thee still,
And, on thy blade and dudgeon, gouts of blood,
Which was not so before. There’s no such thing.
It is the bloody business which informs
Thus to mine eyes. Now o’er the one-half world
Nature seems dead, and wicked dreams abuse
The curtained sleep. Witchcraft celebrates
Pale Hecate’s off’rings, and withered murder,
Alarumed by his sentinel, the wolf,
Whose howl’s his watch, thus with his stealthy pace,
With Tarquin’s ravishing strides, towards his
design
Moves like a ghost. Thou sure and firm-set earth,
Hear not my steps, which way they walk, for fear
Thy very stones prate of my whereabouts
And take the present horror from the time,
Which now suits with it. Whiles I threat, he lives.
Words to the heat of deeds too cold breath gives.
A bell rings.
I go, and it is done. The bell invites me.
Hear it not, Duncan, for it is a knell
That summons thee to heaven or to hell.
He exits.
 
Scene 2
Enter Lady Macbeth.
 
LADY MACBETH
That which hath made them drunk hath made me
bold.
What hath quenched them hath given me fire.
Hark!—Peace.
It was the owl that shrieked, the fatal bellman,
Which gives the stern’st good-night. He is about it.
The doors are open, and the surfeited grooms
Do mock their charge with snores. I have drugged
their possets,
That death and nature do contend about them
Whether they live or die.
MACBETH, within  Who’s there? what, ho!
LADY MACBETH
Alack, I am afraid they have awaked,
And ’tis not done. Th’ attempt and not the deed
Confounds us. Hark!—I laid their daggers ready;
He could not miss ’em. Had he not resembled
My father as he slept, I had done ’t.
 
Enter Macbeth with bloody daggers.
 
My husband?
MACBETH
I have done the deed. Didst thou not hear a noise?
LADY MACBETH
I heard the owl scream and the crickets cry.
Did not you speak?
MACBETH  When?
LADY MACBETH  Now.
MACBETH  As I descended?
LADY MACBETH  Ay.
MACBETH  Hark!—Who lies i’ th’ second chamber?
LADY MACBETH  Donalbain.
MACBETH  This is a sorry sight.
LADY MACBETH
A foolish thought, to say a sorry sight.
MACBETH
There’s one did laugh in ’s sleep, and one cried
“Murder!”
That they did wake each other. I stood and heard
them.
But they did say their prayers and addressed them
Again to sleep.
LADY MACBETH  There are two lodged together.
MACBETH
One cried “God bless us” and “Amen” the other,
As they had seen me with these hangman’s hands,
List’ning their fear. I could not say “Amen”
When they did say “God bless us.”
LADY MACBETH  Consider it not so deeply.
MACBETH
But wherefore could not I pronounce “Amen”?
I had most need of blessing, and “Amen”
Stuck in my throat.
LADY MACBETH  These deeds must not be thought
After these ways; so, it will make us mad.
MACBETH
Methought I heard a voice cry “Sleep no more!
Macbeth does murder sleep”—the innocent sleep,
Sleep that knits up the raveled sleave of care,
The death of each day’s life, sore labor’s bath,
Balm of hurt minds, great nature’s second course,
Chief nourisher in life’s feast.
LADY MACBETH  What do you mean?
MACBETH
Still it cried “Sleep no more!” to all the house.
“Glamis hath murdered sleep, and therefore
Cawdor
Shall sleep no more. Macbeth shall sleep no more.”
LADY MACBETH
Who was it that thus cried? Why, worthy thane,
You do unbend your noble strength to think
So brainsickly of things. Go get some water
And wash this filthy witness from your hand.—
Why did you bring these daggers from the place?
They must lie there. Go, carry them and smear
The sleepy grooms with blood.
MACBETH  I’ll go no more.
I am afraid to think what I have done.
Look on ’t again I dare not.
LADY MACBETH  Infirm of purpose!
Give me the daggers. The sleeping and the dead
Are but as pictures. ’Tis the eye of childhood
That fears a painted devil. If he do bleed,
I’ll gild the faces of the grooms withal,
For it must seem their guilt.
She exits with the daggers. Knock within.
MACBETH  Whence is that
knocking?
How is ’t with me when every noise appalls me?
What hands are here! Ha, they pluck out mine eyes.
Will all great Neptune’s ocean wash this blood
Clean from my hand? No, this my hand will rather
The multitudinous seas incarnadine,
Making the green one red.
 
Enter Lady Macbeth.
 
LADY MACBETH
My hands are of your color, but I shame
To wear a heart so white.                                                        	
Knock.
I hear a knocking
At the south entry. Retire we to our chamber.
A little water clears us of this deed.
How easy is it, then! Your constancy
Hath left you unattended.                                                        	
Knock.
Hark, more knocking.
Get on your nightgown, lest occasion call us
And show us to be watchers. Be not lost
So poorly in your thoughts.
MACBETH
To know my deed ’twere best not know myself.
Knock.
Wake Duncan with thy knocking. I would thou
couldst.
They exit.
 
Scene 3
Knocking within. Enter a Porter.
 
PORTER  Here’s a knocking indeed! If a man were
porter of hell gate, he should have old turning the
key. (Knock.) Knock, knock, knock! Who’s there, i’
th’ name of Beelzebub? Here’s a farmer that hanged
himself on th’ expectation of plenty. Come in time!
Have napkins enough about you; here you’ll sweat
for ’t. (Knock.) Knock, knock! Who’s there, in th’
other devil’s name? Faith, here’s an equivocator
that could swear in both the scales against either
scale, who committed treason enough for God’s
sake yet could not equivocate to heaven. O, come in,
equivocator. (Knock.) Knock, knock, knock! Who’s
there? Faith, here’s an English tailor come hither for
stealing out of a French hose. Come in, tailor. Here
you may roast your goose. (Knock.) Knock, knock!
Never at quiet.—What are you?—But this place is
too cold for hell. I’ll devil-porter it no further. I had
thought to have let in some of all professions that go
the primrose way to th’ everlasting bonfire. (Knock.)
Anon, anon!
 
The Porter opens the door to Macduff and Lennox.
 
I pray you, remember the porter.
MACDUFF
Was it so late, friend, ere you went to bed
That you do lie so late?
PORTER  Faith, sir, we were carousing till the second
cock, and drink, sir, is a great provoker of three
things.
MACDUFF  What three things does drink especially
provoke?
PORTER  Marry, sir, nose-painting, sleep, and urine.
Lechery, sir, it provokes and unprovokes. It provokes
the desire, but it takes away the performance.
Therefore much drink may be said to be an
equivocator with lechery. It makes him, and it
mars him; it sets him on, and it takes him off; it
persuades him and disheartens him; makes him
stand to and not stand to; in conclusion, equivocates
him in a sleep and, giving him the lie, leaves
him.
MACDUFF  I believe drink gave thee the lie last night.
PORTER  That it did, sir, i’ th’ very throat on me; but I
requited him for his lie, and, I think, being too
strong for him, though he took up my legs sometime,
yet I made a shift to cast him.
MACDUFF  Is thy master stirring?
 
Enter Macbeth.
 
Our knocking has awaked him. Here he comes.
Porter exits.
LENNOX
Good morrow, noble sir.
MACBETH  Good morrow, both.
MACDUFF
Is the King stirring, worthy thane?
MACBETH  Not yet.
MACDUFF
He did command me to call timely on him.
I have almost slipped the hour.
MACBETH  I’ll bring you to him.
MACDUFF
I know this is a joyful trouble to you,
But yet ’tis one.
MACBETH
The labor we delight in physics pain.
This is the door.
MACDUFF  I’ll make so bold to call,
For ’tis my limited service.                                         	
Macduff exits.
LENNOX  Goes the King hence today?
MACBETH  He does. He did appoint so.
LENNOX
The night has been unruly. Where we lay,
Our chimneys were blown down and, as they say,
Lamentings heard i’ th’ air, strange screams of
death,
And prophesying, with accents terrible,
Of dire combustion and confused events
New hatched to th’ woeful time. The obscure bird
Clamored the livelong night. Some say the Earth
Was feverous and did shake.
MACBETH  ’Twas a rough night.
LENNOX
My young remembrance cannot parallel
A fellow to it.
 
Enter Macduff.
 
MACDUFF  O horror, horror, horror!
Tongue nor heart cannot conceive nor name thee!
MACBETH AND LENNOX  What’s the matter?
MACDUFF
Confusion now hath made his masterpiece.
Most sacrilegious murder hath broke ope
The Lord’s anointed temple and stole thence
The life o’ th’ building.
MACBETH  What is ’t you say? The life?
LENNOX  Mean you his Majesty?
MACDUFF
Approach the chamber and destroy your sight
With a new Gorgon. Do not bid me speak.
See and then speak yourselves.
Macbeth and Lennox exit.
Awake, awake!
Ring the alarum bell.—Murder and treason!
Banquo and Donalbain, Malcolm, awake!
Shake off this downy sleep, death’s counterfeit,
And look on death itself. Up, up, and see
The great doom’s image. Malcolm, Banquo,
As from your graves rise up and walk like sprites
To countenance this horror.—Ring the bell.
Bell rings.
 
Enter Lady Macbeth.
 
LADY MACBETH  What’s the business,
That such a hideous trumpet calls to parley
The sleepers of the house? Speak, speak!
MACDUFF  O gentle lady,
’Tis not for you to hear what I can speak.
The repetition in a woman’s ear
Would murder as it fell.
 
Enter Banquo.
 
O Banquo, Banquo,
Our royal master’s murdered.
LADY MACBETH  Woe, alas!
What, in our house?
BANQUO  Too cruel anywhere.—
Dear Duff, I prithee, contradict thyself
And say it is not so.
 
Enter Macbeth, Lennox, and Ross.
 
MACBETH
Had I but died an hour before this chance,
I had lived a blessèd time; for from this instant
There’s nothing serious in mortality.
All is but toys. Renown and grace is dead.
The wine of life is drawn, and the mere lees
Is left this vault to brag of.
 
Enter Malcolm and Donalbain.
 
DONALBAIN  What is amiss?
MACBETH  You are, and do not know ’t.
The spring, the head, the fountain of your blood
Is stopped; the very source of it is stopped.
MACDUFF
Your royal father’s murdered.
MALCOLM  O, by whom?
LENNOX
Those of his chamber, as it seemed, had done ’t.
Their hands and faces were all badged with blood.
So were their daggers, which unwiped we found
Upon their pillows. They stared and were distracted.
No man’s life was to be trusted with them.
MACBETH
O, yet I do repent me of my fury,
That I did kill them.
MACDUFF  Wherefore did you so?
MACBETH
Who can be wise, amazed, temp’rate, and furious,
Loyal, and neutral, in a moment? No man.
Th’ expedition of my violent love
Outrun the pauser, reason. Here lay Duncan,
His silver skin laced with his golden blood,
And his gashed stabs looked like a breach in nature
For ruin’s wasteful entrance; there the murderers,
Steeped in the colors of their trade, their daggers
Unmannerly breeched with gore. Who could refrain
That had a heart to love, and in that heart
Courage to make ’s love known?
LADY MACBETH  Help me hence, ho!
MACDUFF
Look to the lady.
MALCOLM, aside to Donalbain  Why do we hold our
tongues,
That most may claim this argument for ours?
DONALBAIN, aside to Malcolm
What should be spoken here, where our fate,
Hid in an auger hole, may rush and seize us?
Let’s away. Our tears are not yet brewed.
MALCOLM, aside to Donalbain
Nor our strong sorrow upon the foot of motion.
BANQUO  Look to the lady.
Lady Macbeth is assisted to leave.
And when we have our naked frailties hid,
That suffer in exposure, let us meet
And question this most bloody piece of work
To know it further. Fears and scruples shake us.
In the great hand of God I stand, and thence
Against the undivulged pretense I fight
Of treasonous malice.
MACDUFF  And so do I.
ALL  So all.
MACBETH
Let’s briefly put on manly readiness
And meet i’ th’ hall together.
ALL  Well contented.
All but Malcolm and Donalbain exit.
MALCOLM
What will you do? Let’s not consort with them.
To show an unfelt sorrow is an office
Which the false man does easy. I’ll to England.
DONALBAIN
To Ireland I. Our separated fortune
Shall keep us both the safer. Where we are,
There’s daggers in men’s smiles. The near in blood,
The nearer bloody.
MALCOLM  This murderous shaft that’s shot
Hath not yet lighted, and our safest way
Is to avoid the aim. Therefore to horse,
And let us not be dainty of leave-taking
But shift away. There’s warrant in that theft
Which steals itself when there’s no mercy left.
They exit.
 
Scene 4
Enter Ross with an Old Man.
 
OLD MAN
Threescore and ten I can remember well,
Within the volume of which time I have seen
Hours dreadful and things strange, but this sore
night
Hath trifled former knowings.
ROSS  Ha, good father,
Thou seest the heavens, as troubled with man’s act,
Threatens his bloody stage. By th’ clock ’tis day,
And yet dark night strangles the traveling lamp.
Is ’t night’s predominance or the day’s shame
That darkness does the face of earth entomb
When living light should kiss it?
OLD MAN  ’Tis unnatural,
Even like the deed that’s done. On Tuesday last
A falcon, tow’ring in her pride of place,
Was by a mousing owl hawked at and killed.
ROSS
And Duncan’s horses (a thing most strange and
certain),
Beauteous and swift, the minions of their race,
Turned wild in nature, broke their stalls, flung out,
Contending ’gainst obedience, as they would
Make war with mankind.
OLD MAN  ’Tis said they eat each
other.
ROSS
They did so, to th’ amazement of mine eyes
That looked upon ’t.
 
Enter Macduff.
 
Here comes the good
Macduff.—
How goes the world, sir, now?
MACDUFF  Why, see you not?
ROSS
Is ’t known who did this more than bloody deed?
MACDUFF
Those that Macbeth hath slain.
ROSS  Alas the day,
What good could they pretend?
MACDUFF  They were suborned.
Malcolm and Donalbain, the King’s two sons,
Are stol’n away and fled, which puts upon them
Suspicion of the deed.
ROSS  ’Gainst nature still!
Thriftless ambition, that will ravin up
Thine own lives’ means. Then ’tis most like
The sovereignty will fall upon Macbeth.
MACDUFF
He is already named and gone to Scone
To be invested.
ROSS  Where is Duncan’s body?
MACDUFF  Carried to Colmekill,
The sacred storehouse of his predecessors
And guardian of their bones.
ROSS  Will you to Scone?
MACDUFF
No, cousin, I’ll to Fife.
ROSS  Well, I will thither.
MACDUFF
Well, may you see things well done there. Adieu,
Lest our old robes sit easier than our new.
ROSS  Farewell, father.
OLD MAN
God’s benison go with you and with those
That would make good of bad and friends of foes.
All exit.
 
 
 

 
 
ACT 3
 
Scene 1
Enter Banquo.
 
BANQUO
Thou hast it now—king, Cawdor, Glamis, all
As the Weïrd Women promised, and I fear
Thou played’st most foully for ’t. Yet it was said
It should not stand in thy posterity,
But that myself should be the root and father
Of many kings. If there come truth from them
(As upon thee, Macbeth, their speeches shine)
Why, by the verities on thee made good,
May they not be my oracles as well,
And set me up in hope? But hush, no more.
 
Sennet sounded. Enter Macbeth as King, Lady
Macbeth, Lennox, Ross, Lords, and Attendants.
 
MACBETH
Here’s our chief guest.
LADY MACBETH  If he had been forgotten,
It had been as a gap in our great feast
And all-thing unbecoming.
MACBETH
Tonight we hold a solemn supper, sir,
And I’ll request your presence.
BANQUO  Let your Highness
Command upon me, to the which my duties
Are with a most indissoluble tie
Forever knit.
MACBETH  Ride you this afternoon?
BANQUO  Ay, my good lord.
MACBETH
We should have else desired your good advice
(Which still hath been both grave and prosperous)
In this day’s council, but we’ll take tomorrow.
Is ’t far you ride?
BANQUO
As far, my lord, as will fill up the time
’Twixt this and supper. Go not my horse the better,
I must become a borrower of the night
For a dark hour or twain.
MACBETH  Fail not our feast.
BANQUO  My lord, I will not.
MACBETH
We hear our bloody cousins are bestowed
In England and in Ireland, not confessing
Their cruel parricide, filling their hearers
With strange invention. But of that tomorrow,
When therewithal we shall have cause of state
Craving us jointly. Hie you to horse. Adieu,
Till you return at night. Goes Fleance with you?
BANQUO
Ay, my good lord. Our time does call upon ’s.
MACBETH
I wish your horses swift and sure of foot,
And so I do commend you to their backs.
Farewell.                                                                       	
Banquo exits.
Let every man be master of his time
Till seven at night. To make society
The sweeter welcome, we will keep ourself
Till suppertime alone. While then, God be with you.
Lords and all but Macbeth and a Servant exit.
Sirrah, a word with you. Attend those men
Our pleasure?
SERVANT
They are, my lord, without the palace gate.
MACBETH
Bring them before us.                                                   	
Servant exits.
To be thus is nothing,
But to be safely thus. Our fears in Banquo
Stick deep, and in his royalty of nature
Reigns that which would be feared. ’Tis much he
dares,
And to that dauntless temper of his mind
He hath a wisdom that doth guide his valor
To act in safety. There is none but he
Whose being I do fear; and under him
My genius is rebuked, as it is said
Mark Antony’s was by Caesar. He chid the sisters
When first they put the name of king upon me
And bade them speak to him. Then, prophet-like,
They hailed him father to a line of kings.
Upon my head they placed a fruitless crown
And put a barren scepter in my grip,
Thence to be wrenched with an unlineal hand,
No son of mine succeeding. If ’t be so,
For Banquo’s issue have I filed my mind;
For them the gracious Duncan have I murdered,
Put rancors in the vessel of my peace
Only for them, and mine eternal jewel
Given to the common enemy of man
To make them kings, the seeds of Banquo kings.
Rather than so, come fate into the list,
And champion me to th’ utterance.—Who’s there?
 
Enter Servant and two Murderers.
 
To the Servant. Now go to the door, and stay there
till we call.                                                                  	
Servant exits.
Was it not yesterday we spoke together?
MURDERERS
It was, so please your Highness.
MACBETH  Well then, now
Have you considered of my speeches? Know
That it was he, in the times past, which held you
So under fortune, which you thought had been
Our innocent self. This I made good to you
In our last conference, passed in probation with you
How you were borne in hand, how crossed, the
instruments,
Who wrought with them, and all things else that
might
To half a soul and to a notion crazed
Say “Thus did Banquo.”
FIRST MURDERER  You made it known to us.
MACBETH
I did so, and went further, which is now
Our point of second meeting. Do you find
Your patience so predominant in your nature
That you can let this go? Are you so gospeled
To pray for this good man and for his issue,
Whose heavy hand hath bowed you to the grave
And beggared yours forever?
FIRST MURDERER  We are men, my liege.
MACBETH
Ay, in the catalogue you go for men,
As hounds and greyhounds, mongrels, spaniels,
curs,
Shoughs, water-rugs, and demi-wolves are clept
All by the name of dogs. The valued file
Distinguishes the swift, the slow, the subtle,
The housekeeper, the hunter, every one
According to the gift which bounteous nature
Hath in him closed; whereby he does receive
Particular addition, from the bill
That writes them all alike. And so of men.
Now, if you have a station in the file,
Not i’ th’ worst rank of manhood, say ’t,
And I will put that business in your bosoms
Whose execution takes your enemy off,
Grapples you to the heart and love of us,
Who wear our health but sickly in his life,
Which in his death were perfect.
SECOND MURDERER  I am one, my liege,
Whom the vile blows and buffets of the world
Hath so incensed that I am reckless what
I do to spite the world.
FIRST MURDERER  And I another
So weary with disasters, tugged with fortune,
That I would set my life on any chance,
To mend it or be rid on ’t.
MACBETH  Both of you
Know Banquo was your enemy.
MURDERERS  True, my lord.
MACBETH
So is he mine, and in such bloody distance
That every minute of his being thrusts
Against my near’st of life. And though I could
With barefaced power sweep him from my sight
And bid my will avouch it, yet I must not,
For certain friends that are both his and mine,
Whose loves I may not drop, but wail his fall
Who I myself struck down. And thence it is
That I to your assistance do make love,
Masking the business from the common eye
For sundry weighty reasons.
SECOND MURDERER  We shall, my lord,
Perform what you command us.
FIRST MURDERER  Though our lives—
MACBETH
Your spirits shine through you. Within this hour at
most
I will advise you where to plant yourselves,
Acquaint you with the perfect spy o’ th’ time,
The moment on ’t, for ’t must be done tonight
And something from the palace; always thought
That I require a clearness. And with him
(To leave no rubs nor botches in the work)
Fleance, his son, that keeps him company,
Whose absence is no less material to me
Than is his father’s, must embrace the fate
Of that dark hour. Resolve yourselves apart.
I’ll come to you anon.
MURDERERS  We are resolved, my lord.
MACBETH
I’ll call upon you straight. Abide within.
Murderers exit.
It is concluded. Banquo, thy soul’s flight,
If it find heaven, must find it out tonight.
He exits.
 
Scene 2
Enter Macbeth’s Lady and a Servant.
 
LADY MACBETH  Is Banquo gone from court?
SERVANT
Ay, madam, but returns again tonight.
LADY MACBETH
Say to the King I would attend his leisure
For a few words.
SERVANT  Madam, I will.                                                      	
He exits.
LADY MACBETH  Naught’s had, all’s spent,
Where our desire is got without content.
’Tis safer to be that which we destroy
Than by destruction dwell in doubtful joy.
 
Enter Macbeth.
 
How now, my lord, why do you keep alone,
Of sorriest fancies your companions making,
Using those thoughts which should indeed have died
With them they think on? Things without all remedy
Should be without regard. What’s done is done.
MACBETH
We have scorched the snake, not killed it.
She’ll close and be herself whilst our poor malice
Remains in danger of her former tooth.
But let the frame of things disjoint, both the worlds
suffer,
Ere we will eat our meal in fear, and sleep
In the affliction of these terrible dreams
That shake us nightly. Better be with the dead,
Whom we, to gain our peace, have sent to peace,
Than on the torture of the mind to lie
In restless ecstasy. Duncan is in his grave.
After life’s fitful fever he sleeps well.
Treason has done his worst; nor steel nor poison,
Malice domestic, foreign levy, nothing
Can touch him further.
LADY MACBETH  Come on, gentle my lord,
Sleek o’er your rugged looks. Be bright and jovial
Among your guests tonight.
MACBETH  So shall I, love,
And so I pray be you. Let your remembrance
Apply to Banquo; present him eminence
Both with eye and tongue: unsafe the while that we
Must lave our honors in these flattering streams
And make our faces vizards to our hearts,
Disguising what they are.
LADY MACBETH  You must leave this.
MACBETH
O, full of scorpions is my mind, dear wife!
Thou know’st that Banquo and his Fleance lives.
LADY MACBETH
But in them nature’s copy’s not eterne.
MACBETH
There’s comfort yet; they are assailable.
Then be thou jocund. Ere the bat hath flown
His cloistered flight, ere to black Hecate’s summons
The shard-born beetle with his drowsy hums
Hath rung night’s yawning peal, there shall be done
A deed of dreadful note.
LADY MACBETH  What’s to be done?
MACBETH
Be innocent of the knowledge, dearest chuck,
Till thou applaud the deed.—Come, seeling night,
Scarf up the tender eye of pitiful day
And with thy bloody and invisible hand
Cancel and tear to pieces that great bond
Which keeps me pale. Light thickens, and the crow
Makes wing to th’ rooky wood.
Good things of day begin to droop and drowse,
Whiles night’s black agents to their preys do
rouse.—
Thou marvel’st at my words, but hold thee still.
Things bad begun make strong themselves by ill.
So prithee go with me.
They exit.
 
Scene 3
Enter three Murderers.
 
FIRST MURDERER
But who did bid thee join with us?
THIRD MURDERER  Macbeth.
SECOND MURDERER, to the First Murderer
He needs not our mistrust, since he delivers
Our offices and what we have to do
To the direction just.
FIRST MURDERER  Then stand with us.—
The west yet glimmers with some streaks of day.
Now spurs the lated traveler apace
To gain the timely inn, and near approaches
The subject of our watch.
THIRD MURDERER  Hark, I hear horses.
BANQUO, within  Give us a light there, ho!
SECOND MURDERER  Then ’tis he. The rest
That are within the note of expectation
Already are i’ th’ court.
FIRST MURDERER  His horses go about.
THIRD MURDERER
Almost a mile; but he does usually
(So all men do) from hence to th’ palace gate
Make it their walk.
 
Enter Banquo and Fleance, with a torch.
 
SECOND MURDERER  A light, a light!
THIRD MURDERER  ’Tis he.
FIRST MURDERER  Stand to ’t.
BANQUO, to Fleance  It will be rain tonight.
FIRST MURDERER  Let it come down!
The three Murderers attack.
BANQUO
O treachery! Fly, good Fleance, fly, fly, fly!
Thou mayst revenge—O slave!
He dies. Fleance exits.
THIRD MURDERER
Who did strike out the light?
FIRST MURDERER  Was ’t not the way?
THIRD MURDERER  There’s but one down. The son is
fled.
SECOND MURDERER  We have lost best half of our
affair.
FIRST MURDERER
Well, let’s away and say how much is done.
They exit.
 
Scene 4
Banquet prepared. Enter Macbeth, Lady Macbeth,
Ross, Lennox, Lords, and Attendants.
 
MACBETH
You know your own degrees; sit down. At first
And last, the hearty welcome.                                              	
They sit.
LORDS  Thanks to your Majesty.
MACBETH
Ourself will mingle with society
And play the humble host.
Our hostess keeps her state, but in best time
We will require her welcome.
LADY MACBETH
Pronounce it for me, sir, to all our friends,
For my heart speaks they are welcome.
 
Enter First Murderer to the door.
 
MACBETH
See, they encounter thee with their hearts’ thanks.
Both sides are even. Here I’ll sit i’ th’ midst.
Be large in mirth. Anon we’ll drink a measure
The table round. He approaches the Murderer. There’s
blood upon thy face.
MURDERER  ’Tis Banquo’s then.
MACBETH
’Tis better thee without than he within.
Is he dispatched?
MURDERER
My lord, his throat is cut. That I did for him.
MACBETH
Thou art the best o’ th’ cutthroats,
Yet he’s good that did the like for Fleance.
If thou didst it, thou art the nonpareil.
MURDERER
Most royal sir, Fleance is ’scaped.
MACBETH, aside
Then comes my fit again. I had else been perfect,
Whole as the marble, founded as the rock,
As broad and general as the casing air.
But now I am cabined, cribbed, confined, bound in
To saucy doubts and fears.—But Banquo’s safe?
MURDERER
Ay, my good lord. Safe in a ditch he bides,
With twenty trenchèd gashes on his head,
The least a death to nature.
MACBETH  Thanks for that.
There the grown serpent lies. The worm that’s fled
Hath nature that in time will venom breed,
No teeth for th’ present. Get thee gone. Tomorrow
We’ll hear ourselves again.                                      	
Murderer exits.
LADY MACBETH  My royal lord,
You do not give the cheer. The feast is sold
That is not often vouched, while ’tis a-making,
’Tis given with welcome. To feed were best at home;
From thence, the sauce to meat is ceremony;
Meeting were bare without it.
 
Enter the Ghost of Banquo, and sits in Macbeth’s place.
 
MACBETH, to Lady Macbeth  Sweet remembrancer!—
Now, good digestion wait on appetite
And health on both!
LENNOX  May ’t please your Highness sit.
MACBETH
Here had we now our country’s honor roofed,
Were the graced person of our Banquo present,
Who may I rather challenge for unkindness
Than pity for mischance.
ROSS  His absence, sir,
Lays blame upon his promise. Please ’t your
Highness
To grace us with your royal company?
MACBETH
The table’s full.
LENNOX  Here is a place reserved, sir.
MACBETH  Where?
LENNOX
Here, my good lord. What is ’t that moves your
Highness?
MACBETH
Which of you have done this?
LORDS  What, my good lord?
MACBETH, to the Ghost
Thou canst not say I did it. Never shake
Thy gory locks at me.
ROSS
Gentlemen, rise. His Highness is not well.
LADY MACBETH
Sit, worthy friends. My lord is often thus
And hath been from his youth. Pray you, keep seat.
The fit is momentary; upon a thought
He will again be well. If much you note him
You shall offend him and extend his passion.
Feed and regard him not.                           	
Drawing Macbeth aside.
Are you a man?
MACBETH
Ay, and a bold one, that dare look on that
Which might appall the devil.
LADY MACBETH  O, proper stuff!
This is the very painting of your fear.
This is the air-drawn dagger which you said
Led you to Duncan. O, these flaws and starts,
Impostors to true fear, would well become
A woman’s story at a winter’s fire,
Authorized by her grandam. Shame itself!
Why do you make such faces? When all’s done,
You look but on a stool.
MACBETH
Prithee, see there. Behold, look! To the Ghost. Lo,
how say you?
Why, what care I? If thou canst nod, speak too.—
If charnel houses and our graves must send
Those that we bury back, our monuments
Shall be the maws of kites.                                             	
Ghost exits.
LADY MACBETH  What, quite unmanned in folly?
MACBETH
If I stand here, I saw him.
LADY MACBETH  Fie, for shame!
MACBETH
Blood hath been shed ere now, i’ th’ olden time,
Ere humane statute purged the gentle weal;
Ay, and since too, murders have been performed
Too terrible for the ear. The time has been
That, when the brains were out, the man would die,
And there an end. But now they rise again
With twenty mortal murders on their crowns
And push us from our stools. This is more strange
Than such a murder is.
LADY MACBETH  My worthy lord,
Your noble friends do lack you.
MACBETH  I do forget.—
Do not muse at me, my most worthy friends.
I have a strange infirmity, which is nothing
To those that know me. Come, love and health to
all.
Then I’ll sit down.—Give me some wine. Fill full.
 
Enter Ghost.
 
I drink to th’ general joy o’ th’ whole table
And to our dear friend Banquo, whom we miss.
Would he were here! To all, and him we thirst,
And all to all.
LORDS  Our duties, and the pledge.
They raise their drinking cups.
MACBETH, to the Ghost
Avaunt, and quit my sight! Let the earth hide thee.
Thy bones are marrowless; thy blood is cold;
Thou hast no speculation in those eyes
Which thou dost glare with.
LADY MACBETH  Think of this, good
peers,
But as a thing of custom. ’Tis no other;
Only it spoils the pleasure of the time.
MACBETH, to the Ghost  What man dare, I dare.
Approach thou like the rugged Russian bear,
The armed rhinoceros, or th’ Hyrcan tiger;
Take any shape but that, and my firm nerves
Shall never tremble. Or be alive again
And dare me to the desert with thy sword.
If trembling I inhabit then, protest me
The baby of a girl. Hence, horrible shadow!
Unreal mock’ry, hence!                                                  	
Ghost exits.
Why so, being gone,
I am a man again.—Pray you sit still.
LADY MACBETH
You have displaced the mirth, broke the good
meeting
With most admired disorder.
MACBETH  Can such things be
And overcome us like a summer’s cloud,
Without our special wonder? You make me strange
Even to the disposition that I owe
When now I think you can behold such sights
And keep the natural ruby of your cheeks
When mine is blanched with fear.
ROSS  What sights, my
lord?
LADY MACBETH
I pray you, speak not. He grows worse and worse.
Question enrages him. At once, good night.
Stand not upon the order of your going,
But go at once.
LENNOX  Good night, and better health
Attend his Majesty.
LADY MACBETH  A kind good night to all.
Lords and all but Macbeth and Lady Macbeth exit.
MACBETH
It will have blood, they say; blood will have blood.
Stones have been known to move, and trees to
speak.
Augurs and understood relations have
By maggot pies and choughs and rooks brought
forth
The secret’st man of blood.—What is the night?
LADY MACBETH
Almost at odds with morning, which is which.
MACBETH
How say’st thou that Macduff denies his person
At our great bidding?
LADY MACBETH  Did you send to him, sir?
MACBETH
I hear it by the way; but I will send.
There’s not a one of them but in his house
I keep a servant fee’d. I will tomorrow
(And betimes I will) to the Weïrd Sisters.
More shall they speak, for now I am bent to know
By the worst means the worst. For mine own good,
All causes shall give way. I am in blood
Stepped in so far that, should I wade no more,
Returning were as tedious as go o’er.
Strange things I have in head that will to hand,
Which must be acted ere they may be scanned.
LADY MACBETH
You lack the season of all natures, sleep.
MACBETH
Come, we’ll to sleep. My strange and self-abuse
Is the initiate fear that wants hard use.
We are yet but young in deed.
They exit.
 
Scene 5
Thunder. Enter the three Witches, meeting Hecate.
 
FIRST WITCH
Why, how now, Hecate? You look angerly.
HECATE
Have I not reason, beldams as you are?
Saucy and overbold, how did you dare
To trade and traffic with Macbeth
In riddles and affairs of death,
And I, the mistress of your charms,
The close contriver of all harms,
Was never called to bear my part
Or show the glory of our art?
And which is worse, all you have done
Hath been but for a wayward son,
Spiteful and wrathful, who, as others do,
Loves for his own ends, not for you.
But make amends now. Get you gone,
And at the pit of Acheron
Meet me i’ th’ morning. Thither he
Will come to know his destiny.
Your vessels and your spells provide,
Your charms and everything beside.
I am for th’ air. This night I’ll spend
Unto a dismal and a fatal end.
Great business must be wrought ere noon.
Upon the corner of the moon
There hangs a vap’rous drop profound.
I’ll catch it ere it come to ground,
And that, distilled by magic sleights,
Shall raise such artificial sprites
As by the strength of their illusion
Shall draw him on to his confusion.
He shall spurn fate, scorn death, and bear
His hopes ’bove wisdom, grace, and fear.
And you all know, security
Is mortals’ chiefest enemy.
Music and a song.
Hark! I am called. My little spirit, see,
Sits in a foggy cloud and stays for me.                        	
Hecate exits.
Sing within “Come away, come away,” etc.
FIRST WITCH
Come, let’s make haste. She’ll soon be back again.
They exit.
 
Scene 6
Enter Lennox and another Lord.
 
LENNOX
My former speeches have but hit your thoughts,
Which can interpret farther. Only I say
Things have been strangely borne. The gracious
Duncan
Was pitied of Macbeth; marry, he was dead.
And the right valiant Banquo walked too late,
Whom you may say, if ’t please you, Fleance killed,
For Fleance fled. Men must not walk too late.
Who cannot want the thought how monstrous
It was for Malcolm and for Donalbain
To kill their gracious father? Damnèd fact,
How it did grieve Macbeth! Did he not straight
In pious rage the two delinquents tear
That were the slaves of drink and thralls of sleep?
Was not that nobly done? Ay, and wisely, too,
For ’twould have angered any heart alive
To hear the men deny ’t. So that I say
He has borne all things well. And I do think
That had he Duncan’s sons under his key
(As, an ’t please heaven, he shall not) they should
find
What ’twere to kill a father. So should Fleance.
But peace. For from broad words, and ’cause he
failed
His presence at the tyrant’s feast, I hear
Macduff lives in disgrace. Sir, can you tell
Where he bestows himself?
LORD  The son of Duncan
(From whom this tyrant holds the due of birth)
Lives in the English court and is received
Of the most pious Edward with such grace
That the malevolence of fortune nothing
Takes from his high respect. Thither Macduff
Is gone to pray the holy king upon his aid
To wake Northumberland and warlike Siward
That, by the help of these (with Him above
To ratify the work), we may again
Give to our tables meat, sleep to our nights,
Free from our feasts and banquets bloody knives,
Do faithful homage, and receive free honors,
All which we pine for now. And this report
Hath so exasperate the King that he
Prepares for some attempt of war.
LENNOX  Sent he to Macduff?
LORD
He did, and with an absolute “Sir, not I,”
The cloudy messenger turns me his back
And hums, as who should say “You’ll rue the time
That clogs me with this answer.”
LENNOX  And that well might
Advise him to a caution t’ hold what distance
His wisdom can provide. Some holy angel
Fly to the court of England and unfold
His message ere he come, that a swift blessing
May soon return to this our suffering country
Under a hand accursed.
LORD  I’ll send my prayers with him.
They exit.
 
 
 

 
 
ACT 4
 
Scene 1
Thunder. Enter the three Witches.
 
FIRST WITCH
Thrice the brinded cat hath mewed.
SECOND WITCH
Thrice, and once the hedge-pig whined.
THIRD WITCH
Harpier cries “’Tis time, ’tis time!”
FIRST WITCH
Round about the cauldron go;
In the poisoned entrails throw.
Toad, that under cold stone
Days and nights has thirty-one
Sweltered venom sleeping got,
Boil thou first i’ th’ charmèd pot.
The Witches circle the cauldron.
ALL
Double, double toil and trouble;
Fire burn, and cauldron bubble.
SECOND WITCH
Fillet of a fenny snake
In the cauldron boil and bake.
Eye of newt and toe of frog,
Wool of bat and tongue of dog,
Adder’s fork and blindworm’s sting,
Lizard’s leg and howlet’s wing,
For a charm of powerful trouble,
Like a hell-broth boil and bubble.
ALL
Double, double toil and trouble;
Fire burn, and cauldron bubble.
THIRD WITCH
Scale of dragon, tooth of wolf,
Witch’s mummy, maw and gulf
Of the ravined salt-sea shark,
Root of hemlock digged i’ th’ dark,
Liver of blaspheming Jew,
Gall of goat and slips of yew
Slivered in the moon’s eclipse,
Nose of Turk and Tartar’s lips,
Finger of birth-strangled babe
Ditch-delivered by a drab,
Make the gruel thick and slab.
Add thereto a tiger’s chaudron
For th’ ingredience of our cauldron.
ALL
Double, double toil and trouble;
Fire burn, and cauldron bubble.
SECOND WITCH
Cool it with a baboon’s blood.
Then the charm is firm and good.
 
Enter Hecate to the other three Witches.
 
HECATE
O, well done! I commend your pains,
And everyone shall share i’ th’ gains.
And now about the cauldron sing
Like elves and fairies in a ring,
Enchanting all that you put in.
Music and a song: “Black Spirits,” etc. Hecate exits.
SECOND WITCH
By the pricking of my thumbs,
Something wicked this way comes.
Open, locks,
Whoever knocks.
 
Enter Macbeth.
 
MACBETH
How now, you secret, black, and midnight hags?
What is ’t you do?
ALL  A deed without a name.
MACBETH
I conjure you by that which you profess
(Howe’er you come to know it), answer me.
Though you untie the winds and let them fight
Against the churches, though the yeasty waves
Confound and swallow navigation up,
Though bladed corn be lodged and trees blown
down,
Though castles topple on their warders’ heads,
Though palaces and pyramids do slope
Their heads to their foundations, though the
treasure
Of nature’s germens tumble all together
Even till destruction sicken, answer me
To what I ask you.
FIRST WITCH  Speak.
SECOND WITCH  Demand.
THIRD WITCH  We’ll answer.
FIRST WITCH
Say if th’ hadst rather hear it from our mouths
Or from our masters’.
MACBETH  Call ’em. Let me see ’em.
FIRST WITCH
Pour in sow’s blood that hath eaten
Her nine farrow; grease that’s sweaten
From the murderers’ gibbet throw
Into the flame.
ALL  Come high or low;
Thyself and office deftly show.
 
Thunder. First Apparition, an Armed Head.
 
MACBETH
Tell me, thou unknown power—
FIRST WITCH  He knows thy
thought.
Hear his speech but say thou naught.
FIRST APPARITION
Macbeth! Macbeth! Macbeth! Beware Macduff!
Beware the Thane of Fife! Dismiss me. Enough.
He descends.
MACBETH
Whate’er thou art, for thy good caution, thanks.
Thou hast harped my fear aright. But one word
more—
FIRST WITCH
He will not be commanded. Here’s another
More potent than the first.
 
Thunder. Second Apparition, a Bloody Child.
 
SECOND APPARITION  Macbeth! Macbeth! Macbeth!—
MACBETH  Had I three ears, I’d hear thee.
SECOND APPARITION
Be bloody, bold, and resolute. Laugh to scorn
The power of man, for none of woman born
Shall harm Macbeth.                                                     	
He descends.
MACBETH
Then live, Macduff; what need I fear of thee?
But yet I’ll make assurance double sure
And take a bond of fate. Thou shalt not live,
That I may tell pale-hearted fear it lies,
And sleep in spite of thunder.
 
Thunder. Third Apparition, a Child Crowned, with a tree
in his hand.
 
What is this
That rises like the issue of a king
And wears upon his baby brow the round
And top of sovereignty?
ALL  Listen but speak not to ’t.
THIRD APPARITION
Be lion-mettled, proud, and take no care
Who chafes, who frets, or where conspirers are.
Macbeth shall never vanquished be until
Great Birnam Wood to high Dunsinane Hill
Shall come against him.                                                	
He descends.
MACBETH  That will never be.
Who can impress the forest, bid the tree
Unfix his earthbound root? Sweet bodements, good!
Rebellious dead, rise never till the Wood
Of Birnam rise, and our high-placed Macbeth
Shall live the lease of nature, pay his breath
To time and mortal custom. Yet my heart
Throbs to know one thing. Tell me, if your art
Can tell so much: shall Banquo’s issue ever
Reign in this kingdom?
ALL  Seek to know no more.
MACBETH
I will be satisfied. Deny me this,
And an eternal curse fall on you! Let me know!
Cauldron sinks. Hautboys.
Why sinks that cauldron? And what noise is this?
FIRST WITCH  Show.
SECOND WITCH  Show.
THIRD WITCH  Show.
ALL
Show his eyes and grieve his heart.
Come like shadows; so depart.
 
A show of eight kings, the eighth king with a glass in
his hand, and Banquo last.
 
MACBETH
Thou art too like the spirit of Banquo. Down!
Thy crown does sear mine eyeballs. And thy hair,
Thou other gold-bound brow, is like the first.
A third is like the former.—Filthy hags,
Why do you show me this?—A fourth? Start, eyes!
What, will the line stretch out to th’ crack of doom?
Another yet? A seventh? I’ll see no more.
And yet the eighth appears who bears a glass
Which shows me many more, and some I see
That twofold balls and treble scepters carry.
Horrible sight! Now I see ’tis true,
For the blood-boltered Banquo smiles upon me
And points at them for his.
The Apparitions disappear.
What, is this so?
FIRST WITCH
Ay, sir, all this is so. But why
Stands Macbeth thus amazedly?
Come, sisters, cheer we up his sprites
And show the best of our delights.
I’ll charm the air to give a sound
While you perform your antic round,
That this great king may kindly say
Our duties did his welcome pay.
Music. The Witches dance and vanish.
MACBETH
Where are they? Gone? Let this pernicious hour
Stand aye accursèd in the calendar!—
Come in, without there.
 
Enter Lennox.
 
LENNOX  What’s your Grace’s will?
MACBETH
Saw you the Weïrd Sisters?
LENNOX  No, my lord.
MACBETH
Came they not by you?
LENNOX  No, indeed, my lord.
MACBETH
Infected be the air whereon they ride,
And damned all those that trust them! I did hear
The galloping of horse. Who was ’t came by?
LENNOX
’Tis two or three, my lord, that bring you word
Macduff is fled to England.
MACBETH  Fled to England?
LENNOX  Ay, my good lord.
MACBETH, aside
Time, thou anticipat’st my dread exploits.
The flighty purpose never is o’ertook
Unless the deed go with it. From this moment
The very firstlings of my heart shall be
The firstlings of my hand. And even now,
To crown my thoughts with acts, be it thought and
done:
The castle of Macduff I will surprise,
Seize upon Fife, give to th’ edge o’ th’ sword
His wife, his babes, and all unfortunate souls
That trace him in his line. No boasting like a fool;
This deed I’ll do before this purpose cool.
But no more sights!—Where are these gentlemen?
Come bring me where they are.
They exit.
 
Scene 2
Enter Macduff’s Wife, her Son, and Ross.
 
LADY MACDUFF
What had he done to make him fly the land?
ROSS
You must have patience, madam.
LADY MACDUFF  He had none.
His flight was madness. When our actions do not,
Our fears do make us traitors.
ROSS  You know not
Whether it was his wisdom or his fear.
LADY MACDUFF
Wisdom? To leave his wife, to leave his babes,
His mansion and his titles in a place
From whence himself does fly? He loves us not;
He wants the natural touch; for the poor wren,
The most diminutive of birds, will fight,
Her young ones in her nest, against the owl.
All is the fear, and nothing is the love,
As little is the wisdom, where the flight
So runs against all reason.
ROSS  My dearest coz,
I pray you school yourself. But for your husband,
He is noble, wise, judicious, and best knows
The fits o’ th’ season. I dare not speak much
further;
But cruel are the times when we are traitors
And do not know ourselves; when we hold rumor
From what we fear, yet know not what we fear,
But float upon a wild and violent sea
Each way and move—I take my leave of you.
Shall not be long but I’ll be here again.
Things at the worst will cease or else climb upward
To what they were before.—My pretty cousin,
Blessing upon you.
LADY MACDUFF
Fathered he is, and yet he’s fatherless.
ROSS
I am so much a fool, should I stay longer
It would be my disgrace and your discomfort.
I take my leave at once.                                                     	
Ross exits.
LADY MACDUFF  Sirrah, your father’s dead.
And what will you do now? How will you live?
SON
As birds do, mother.
LADY MACDUFF  What, with worms and flies?
SON
With what I get, I mean; and so do they.
LADY MACDUFF
Poor bird, thou ’dst never fear the net nor lime,
The pitfall nor the gin.
SON
Why should I, mother? Poor birds they are not set
for.
My father is not dead, for all your saying.
LADY MACDUFF
Yes, he is dead. How wilt thou do for a father?
SON  Nay, how will you do for a husband?
LADY MACDUFF
Why, I can buy me twenty at any market.
SON  Then you’ll buy ’em to sell again.
LADY MACDUFF  Thou speak’st with all thy wit,
And yet, i’ faith, with wit enough for thee.
SON  Was my father a traitor, mother?
LADY MACDUFF  Ay, that he was.
SON  What is a traitor?
LADY MACDUFF  Why, one that swears and lies.
SON  And be all traitors that do so?
LADY MACDUFF  Every one that does so is a traitor
and must be hanged.
SON  And must they all be hanged that swear and lie?
LADY MACDUFF  Every one.
SON  Who must hang them?
LADY MACDUFF  Why, the honest men.
SON  Then the liars and swearers are fools, for there
are liars and swearers enough to beat the honest
men and hang up them.
LADY MACDUFF  Now God help thee, poor monkey! But
how wilt thou do for a father?
SON  If he were dead, you’d weep for him. If you would
not, it were a good sign that I should quickly have a
new father.
LADY MACDUFF  Poor prattler, how thou talk’st!
 
Enter a Messenger.
 
MESSENGER
Bless you, fair dame. I am not to you known,
Though in your state of honor I am perfect.
I doubt some danger does approach you nearly.
If you will take a homely man’s advice,
Be not found here. Hence with your little ones!
To fright you thus methinks I am too savage;
To do worse to you were fell cruelty,
Which is too nigh your person. Heaven preserve
you!
I dare abide no longer.                                            	
Messenger exits.
LADY MACDUFF  Whither should I fly?
I have done no harm. But I remember now
I am in this earthly world, where to do harm
Is often laudable, to do good sometime
Accounted dangerous folly. Why then, alas,
Do I put up that womanly defense
To say I have done no harm?
 
Enter Murderers.
 
What are these faces?
MURDERER  Where is your husband?
LADY MACDUFF
I hope in no place so unsanctified
Where such as thou mayst find him.
MURDERER  He’s a traitor.
SON
Thou liest, thou shag-eared villain!
MURDERER  What, you egg?
Stabbing him. Young fry of treachery!
SON  He has killed
me, mother.
Run away, I pray you.
Lady Macduff exits, crying “Murder!” followed by the
Murderers bearing the Son’s body.
 
Scene 3
Enter Malcolm and Macduff.
 
MALCOLM
Let us seek out some desolate shade and there
Weep our sad bosoms empty.
MACDUFF  Let us rather
Hold fast the mortal sword and, like good men,
Bestride our downfall’n birthdom. Each new morn
New widows howl, new orphans cry, new sorrows
Strike heaven on the face, that it resounds
As if it felt with Scotland, and yelled out
Like syllable of dolor.
MALCOLM  What I believe, I’ll wail;
What know, believe; and what I can redress,
As I shall find the time to friend, I will.
What you have spoke, it may be so, perchance.
This tyrant, whose sole name blisters our tongues,
Was once thought honest. You have loved him well.
He hath not touched you yet. I am young, but
something
You may deserve of him through me, and wisdom
To offer up a weak, poor, innocent lamb
T’ appease an angry god.
MACDUFF
I am not treacherous.
MALCOLM  But Macbeth is.
A good and virtuous nature may recoil
In an imperial charge. But I shall crave your
pardon.
That which you are, my thoughts cannot transpose.
Angels are bright still, though the brightest fell.
Though all things foul would wear the brows of
grace,
Yet grace must still look so.
MACDUFF  I have lost my hopes.
MALCOLM
Perchance even there where I did find my doubts.
Why in that rawness left you wife and child,
Those precious motives, those strong knots of love,
Without leave-taking? I pray you,
Let not my jealousies be your dishonors,
But mine own safeties. You may be rightly just,
Whatever I shall think.
MACDUFF  Bleed, bleed, poor country!
Great tyranny, lay thou thy basis sure,
For goodness dare not check thee. Wear thou thy
wrongs;
The title is affeered.—Fare thee well, lord.
I would not be the villain that thou think’st
For the whole space that’s in the tyrant’s grasp,
And the rich East to boot.
MALCOLM  Be not offended.
I speak not as in absolute fear of you.
I think our country sinks beneath the yoke.
It weeps, it bleeds, and each new day a gash
Is added to her wounds. I think withal
There would be hands uplifted in my right;
And here from gracious England have I offer
Of goodly thousands. But, for all this,
When I shall tread upon the tyrant’s head
Or wear it on my sword, yet my poor country
Shall have more vices than it had before,
More suffer, and more sundry ways than ever,
By him that shall succeed.
MACDUFF  What should he be?
MALCOLM
It is myself I mean, in whom I know
All the particulars of vice so grafted
That, when they shall be opened, black Macbeth
Will seem as pure as snow, and the poor state
Esteem him as a lamb, being compared
With my confineless harms.
MACDUFF  Not in the legions
Of horrid hell can come a devil more damned
In evils to top Macbeth.
MALCOLM  I grant him bloody,
Luxurious, avaricious, false, deceitful,
Sudden, malicious, smacking of every sin
That has a name. But there’s no bottom, none,
In my voluptuousness. Your wives, your daughters,
Your matrons, and your maids could not fill up
The cistern of my lust, and my desire
All continent impediments would o’erbear
That did oppose my will. Better Macbeth
Than such an one to reign.
MACDUFF  Boundless intemperance
In nature is a tyranny. It hath been
Th’ untimely emptying of the happy throne
And fall of many kings. But fear not yet
To take upon you what is yours. You may
Convey your pleasures in a spacious plenty
And yet seem cold—the time you may so hoodwink.
We have willing dames enough. There cannot be
That vulture in you to devour so many
As will to greatness dedicate themselves,
Finding it so inclined.
MALCOLM  With this there grows
In my most ill-composed affection such
A stanchless avarice that, were I king,
I should cut off the nobles for their lands,
Desire his jewels, and this other’s house;
And my more-having would be as a sauce
To make me hunger more, that I should forge
Quarrels unjust against the good and loyal,
Destroying them for wealth.
MACDUFF  This avarice
Sticks deeper, grows with more pernicious root
Than summer-seeming lust, and it hath been
The sword of our slain kings. Yet do not fear.
Scotland hath foisons to fill up your will
Of your mere own. All these are portable,
With other graces weighed.
MALCOLM
But I have none. The king-becoming graces,
As justice, verity, temp’rance, stableness,
Bounty, perseverance, mercy, lowliness,
Devotion, patience, courage, fortitude,
I have no relish of them but abound
In the division of each several crime,
Acting it many ways. Nay, had I power, I should
Pour the sweet milk of concord into hell,
Uproar the universal peace, confound
All unity on earth.
MACDUFF  O Scotland, Scotland!
MALCOLM
If such a one be fit to govern, speak.
I am as I have spoken.
MACDUFF  Fit to govern?
No, not to live.—O nation miserable,
With an untitled tyrant bloody-sceptered,
When shalt thou see thy wholesome days again,
Since that the truest issue of thy throne
By his own interdiction stands accursed
And does blaspheme his breed?—Thy royal father
Was a most sainted king. The queen that bore thee,
Oft’ner upon her knees than on her feet,
Died every day she lived. Fare thee well.
These evils thou repeat’st upon thyself
Hath banished me from Scotland.—O my breast,
Thy hope ends here!
MALCOLM  Macduff, this noble passion,
Child of integrity, hath from my soul
Wiped the black scruples, reconciled my thoughts
To thy good truth and honor. Devilish Macbeth
By many of these trains hath sought to win me
Into his power, and modest wisdom plucks me
From overcredulous haste. But God above
Deal between thee and me, for even now
I put myself to thy direction and
Unspeak mine own detraction, here abjure
The taints and blames I laid upon myself
For strangers to my nature. I am yet
Unknown to woman, never was forsworn,
Scarcely have coveted what was mine own,
At no time broke my faith, would not betray
The devil to his fellow, and delight
No less in truth than life. My first false speaking
Was this upon myself. What I am truly
Is thine and my poor country’s to command—
Whither indeed, before thy here-approach,
Old Siward with ten thousand warlike men,
Already at a point, was setting forth.
Now we’ll together, and the chance of goodness
Be like our warranted quarrel. Why are you silent?
MACDUFF
Such welcome and unwelcome things at once
’Tis hard to reconcile.
 
Enter a Doctor.
 
MALCOLM  Well, more anon.—
Comes the King forth, I pray you?
DOCTOR
Ay, sir. There are a crew of wretched souls
That stay his cure. Their malady convinces
The great assay of art, but at his touch
(Such sanctity hath heaven given his hand)
They presently amend.
MALCOLM  I thank you, doctor.
Doctor exits.
MACDUFF
What’s the disease he means?
MALCOLM  ’Tis called the evil:
A most miraculous work in this good king,
Which often since my here-remain in England
I have seen him do. How he solicits heaven
Himself best knows, but strangely visited people
All swoll’n and ulcerous, pitiful to the eye,
The mere despair of surgery, he cures,
Hanging a golden stamp about their necks,
Put on with holy prayers; and, ’tis spoken,
To the succeeding royalty he leaves
The healing benediction. With this strange virtue,
He hath a heavenly gift of prophecy,
And sundry blessings hang about his throne
That speak him full of grace.
 
Enter Ross.
 
MACDUFF  See who comes here.
MALCOLM
My countryman, but yet I know him not.
MACDUFF
My ever-gentle cousin, welcome hither.
MALCOLM
I know him now.—Good God betimes remove
The means that makes us strangers!
ROSS  Sir, amen.
MACDUFF
Stands Scotland where it did?
ROSS  Alas, poor country,
Almost afraid to know itself. It cannot
Be called our mother, but our grave, where nothing
But who knows nothing is once seen to smile;
Where sighs and groans and shrieks that rent the air
Are made, not marked; where violent sorrow seems
A modern ecstasy. The dead man’s knell
Is there scarce asked for who, and good men’s lives
Expire before the flowers in their caps,
Dying or ere they sicken.
MACDUFF
O relation too nice and yet too true!
MALCOLM  What’s the newest grief?
ROSS
That of an hour’s age doth hiss the speaker.
Each minute teems a new one.
MACDUFF  How does my wife?
ROSS  Why, well.
MACDUFF  And all my children?
ROSS  Well too.
MACDUFF
The tyrant has not battered at their peace?
ROSS
No, they were well at peace when I did leave ’em.
MACDUFF
Be not a niggard of your speech. How goes ’t?
ROSS
When I came hither to transport the tidings
Which I have heavily borne, there ran a rumor
Of many worthy fellows that were out;
Which was to my belief witnessed the rather
For that I saw the tyrant’s power afoot.
Now is the time of help. Your eye in Scotland
Would create soldiers, make our women fight
To doff their dire distresses.
MALCOLM  Be ’t their comfort
We are coming thither. Gracious England hath
Lent us good Siward and ten thousand men;
An older and a better soldier none
That Christendom gives out.
ROSS  Would I could answer
This comfort with the like. But I have words
That would be howled out in the desert air,
Where hearing should not latch them.
MACDUFF  What concern
they—
The general cause, or is it a fee-grief
Due to some single breast?
ROSS  No mind that’s honest
But in it shares some woe, though the main part
Pertains to you alone.
MACDUFF  If it be mine,
Keep it not from me. Quickly let me have it.
ROSS
Let not your ears despise my tongue forever,
Which shall possess them with the heaviest sound
That ever yet they heard.
MACDUFF  Hum! I guess at it.
ROSS
Your castle is surprised, your wife and babes
Savagely slaughtered. To relate the manner
Were on the quarry of these murdered deer
To add the death of you.
MALCOLM  Merciful heaven!—
What, man, ne’er pull your hat upon your brows.
Give sorrow words. The grief that does not speak
Whispers the o’erfraught heart and bids it break.
MACDUFF  My children too?
ROSS
Wife, children, servants, all that could be found.
MACDUFF
And I must be from thence? My wife killed too?
ROSS  I have said.
MALCOLM  Be comforted.
Let’s make us med’cines of our great revenge
To cure this deadly grief.
MACDUFF
He has no children. All my pretty ones?
Did you say “all”? O hell-kite! All?
What, all my pretty chickens and their dam
At one fell swoop?
MALCOLM  Dispute it like a man.
MACDUFF  I shall do so,
But I must also feel it as a man.
I cannot but remember such things were
That were most precious to me. Did heaven look on
And would not take their part? Sinful Macduff,
They were all struck for thee! Naught that I am,
Not for their own demerits, but for mine,
Fell slaughter on their souls. Heaven rest them now.
MALCOLM
Be this the whetstone of your sword. Let grief
Convert to anger. Blunt not the heart; enrage it.
MACDUFF
O, I could play the woman with mine eyes
And braggart with my tongue! But, gentle heavens,
Cut short all intermission! Front to front
Bring thou this fiend of Scotland and myself.
Within my sword’s length set him. If he ’scape,
Heaven forgive him too.
MALCOLM  This tune goes manly.
Come, go we to the King. Our power is ready;
Our lack is nothing but our leave. Macbeth
Is ripe for shaking, and the powers above
Put on their instruments. Receive what cheer you
may.
The night is long that never finds the day.
They exit.
 
 
 

 
 
ACT 5
 
Scene 1
Enter a Doctor of Physic and a Waiting-Gentlewoman.
 
DOCTOR  I have two nights watched with you but can
perceive no truth in your report. When was it she
last walked?
GENTLEWOMAN  Since his Majesty went into the field, I
have seen her rise from her bed, throw her nightgown
upon her, unlock her closet, take forth paper,
fold it, write upon ’t, read it, afterwards seal it, and
again return to bed; yet all this while in a most fast
sleep.
DOCTOR  A great perturbation in nature, to receive at
once the benefit of sleep and do the effects of
watching. In this slumb’ry agitation, besides her
walking and other actual performances, what at any
time have you heard her say?
GENTLEWOMAN  That, sir, which I will not report after
her.
DOCTOR  You may to me, and ’tis most meet you
should.
GENTLEWOMAN  Neither to you nor anyone, having no
witness to confirm my speech.
 
Enter Lady Macbeth with a taper.
 
Lo you, here she comes. This is her very guise and,
upon my life, fast asleep. Observe her; stand close.
DOCTOR  How came she by that light?
GENTLEWOMAN  Why, it stood by her. She has light by
her continually. ’Tis her command.
DOCTOR  You see her eyes are open.
GENTLEWOMAN  Ay, but their sense are shut.
DOCTOR  What is it she does now? Look how she rubs
her hands.
GENTLEWOMAN  It is an accustomed action with her to
seem thus washing her hands. I have known her
continue in this a quarter of an hour.
LADY MACBETH  Yet here’s a spot.
DOCTOR  Hark, she speaks. I will set down what comes
from her, to satisfy my remembrance the more
strongly.
LADY MACBETH  Out, damned spot, out, I say! One. Two.
Why then, ’tis time to do ’t. Hell is murky. Fie, my
lord, fie, a soldier and afeard? What need we fear
who knows it, when none can call our power to
account? Yet who would have thought the old man
to have had so much blood in him?
DOCTOR  Do you mark that?
LADY MACBETH  The Thane of Fife had a wife. Where is
she now? What, will these hands ne’er be clean? No
more o’ that, my lord, no more o’ that. You mar all
with this starting.
DOCTOR  Go to, go to. You have known what you should
not.
GENTLEWOMAN  She has spoke what she should not,
I am sure of that. Heaven knows what she has
known.
LADY MACBETH  Here’s the smell of the blood still. All
the perfumes of Arabia will not sweeten this little
hand. O, O, O!
DOCTOR  What a sigh is there! The heart is sorely
charged.
GENTLEWOMAN  I would not have such a heart in my
bosom for the dignity of the whole body.
DOCTOR  Well, well, well.
GENTLEWOMAN  Pray God it be, sir.
DOCTOR  This disease is beyond my practice. Yet I have
known those which have walked in their sleep,
who have died holily in their beds.
LADY MACBETH  Wash your hands. Put on your nightgown.
Look not so pale. I tell you yet again, Banquo’s
buried; he cannot come out on ’s grave.
DOCTOR  Even so?
LADY MACBETH  To bed, to bed. There’s knocking at the
gate. Come, come, come, come. Give me your
hand. What’s done cannot be undone. To bed, to
bed, to bed.                                                      	
Lady Macbeth exits.
DOCTOR  Will she go now to bed?
GENTLEWOMAN  Directly.
DOCTOR
Foul whisp’rings are abroad. Unnatural deeds
Do breed unnatural troubles. Infected minds
To their deaf pillows will discharge their secrets.
More needs she the divine than the physician.
God, God forgive us all. Look after her.
Remove from her the means of all annoyance
And still keep eyes upon her. So, good night.
My mind she has mated, and amazed my sight.
I think but dare not speak.
GENTLEWOMAN  Good night, good doctor.
They exit.
 
Scene 2
Drum and Colors. Enter Menteith, Caithness, Angus,
Lennox, and Soldiers.
 
MENTEITH
The English power is near, led on by Malcolm,
His uncle Siward, and the good Macduff.
Revenges burn in them, for their dear causes
Would to the bleeding and the grim alarm
Excite the mortified man.
ANGUS  Near Birnam Wood
Shall we well meet them. That way are they coming.
CAITHNESS
Who knows if Donalbain be with his brother?
LENNOX
For certain, sir, he is not. I have a file
Of all the gentry. There is Siward’s son
And many unrough youths that even now
Protest their first of manhood.
MENTEITH  What does the tyrant?
CAITHNESS
Great Dunsinane he strongly fortifies.
Some say he’s mad; others that lesser hate him
Do call it valiant fury. But for certain
He cannot buckle his distempered cause
Within the belt of rule.
ANGUS  Now does he feel
His secret murders sticking on his hands.
Now minutely revolts upbraid his faith-breach.
Those he commands move only in command,
Nothing in love. Now does he feel his title
Hang loose about him, like a giant’s robe
Upon a dwarfish thief.
MENTEITH  Who, then, shall blame
His pestered senses to recoil and start
When all that is within him does condemn
Itself for being there?
CAITHNESS  Well, march we on
To give obedience where ’tis truly owed.
Meet we the med’cine of the sickly weal,
And with him pour we in our country’s purge
Each drop of us.
LENNOX  Or so much as it needs
To dew the sovereign flower and drown the weeds.
Make we our march towards Birnam.
They exit marching.
 
Scene 3
Enter Macbeth, the Doctor, and Attendants.
 
MACBETH
Bring me no more reports. Let them fly all.
Till Birnam Wood remove to Dunsinane
I cannot taint with fear. What’s the boy Malcolm?
Was he not born of woman? The spirits that know
All mortal consequences have pronounced me thus:
“Fear not, Macbeth. No man that’s born of woman
Shall e’er have power upon thee.” Then fly, false
thanes,
And mingle with the English epicures.
The mind I sway by and the heart I bear
Shall never sag with doubt nor shake with fear.
 
Enter Servant.
 
The devil damn thee black, thou cream-faced loon!
Where got’st thou that goose-look?
SERVANT  There is ten thousand—
MACBETH  Geese, villain?
SERVANT  Soldiers, sir.
MACBETH
Go prick thy face and over-red thy fear,
Thou lily-livered boy. What soldiers, patch?
Death of thy soul! Those linen cheeks of thine
Are counselors to fear. What soldiers, whey-face?
SERVANT  The English force, so please you.
MACBETH
Take thy face hence.                                                     	
Servant exits.
Seyton!—I am sick at heart
When I behold—Seyton, I say!—This push
Will cheer me ever or disseat me now.
I have lived long enough. My way of life
Is fall’n into the sere, the yellow leaf,
And that which should accompany old age,
As honor, love, obedience, troops of friends,
I must not look to have, but in their stead
Curses, not loud but deep, mouth-honor, breath
Which the poor heart would fain deny and dare
not.—
Seyton!
 
Enter Seyton.
 
SEYTON
What’s your gracious pleasure?
MACBETH  What news more?
SEYTON
All is confirmed, my lord, which was reported.
MACBETH
I’ll fight till from my bones my flesh be hacked.
Give me my armor.
SEYTON  ’Tis not needed yet.
MACBETH  I’ll put it on.
Send out more horses. Skirr the country round.
Hang those that talk of fear. Give me mine
armor.—
How does your patient, doctor?
DOCTOR  Not so sick, my lord,
As she is troubled with thick-coming fancies
That keep her from her rest.
MACBETH  Cure her of that.
Canst thou not minister to a mind diseased,
Pluck from the memory a rooted sorrow,
Raze out the written troubles of the brain,
And with some sweet oblivious antidote
Cleanse the stuffed bosom of that perilous stuff
Which weighs upon the heart?
DOCTOR  Therein the patient
Must minister to himself.
MACBETH
Throw physic to the dogs. I’ll none of it.—
Come, put mine armor on. Give me my staff.
Attendants begin to arm him.
Seyton, send out.—Doctor, the thanes fly from
me.—
Come, sir, dispatch.—If thou couldst, doctor, cast
The water of my land, find her disease,
And purge it to a sound and pristine health,
I would applaud thee to the very echo
That should applaud again.—Pull ’t off, I say.—
What rhubarb, senna, or what purgative drug
Would scour these English hence? Hear’st thou of
them?
DOCTOR
Ay, my good lord. Your royal preparation
Makes us hear something.
MACBETH  Bring it after me.—
I will not be afraid of death and bane
Till Birnam Forest come to Dunsinane.
DOCTOR, aside
Were I from Dunsinane away and clear,
Profit again should hardly draw me here.
They exit.
 
Scene 4
Drum and Colors. Enter Malcolm, Siward, Macduff,
Siward’s son, Menteith, Caithness, Angus, and Soldiers,
marching.
 
MALCOLM
Cousins, I hope the days are near at hand
That chambers will be safe.
MENTEITH  We doubt it nothing.
SIWARD
What wood is this before us?
MENTEITH  The Wood of Birnam.
MALCOLM
Let every soldier hew him down a bough
And bear ’t before him. Thereby shall we shadow
The numbers of our host and make discovery
Err in report of us.
SOLDIER  It shall be done.
SIWARD
We learn no other but the confident tyrant
Keeps still in Dunsinane and will endure
Our setting down before ’t.
MALCOLM  ’Tis his main hope;
For, where there is advantage to be given,
Both more and less have given him the revolt,
And none serve with him but constrainèd things
Whose hearts are absent too.
MACDUFF  Let our just censures
Attend the true event, and put we on
Industrious soldiership.
SIWARD  The time approaches
That will with due decision make us know
What we shall say we have and what we owe.
Thoughts speculative their unsure hopes relate,
But certain issue strokes must arbitrate;
Towards which, advance the war.
They exit marching.
 
Scene 5
Enter Macbeth, Seyton, and Soldiers, with Drum and
Colors.
 
MACBETH
Hang out our banners on the outward walls.
The cry is still “They come!” Our castle’s strength
Will laugh a siege to scorn. Here let them lie
Till famine and the ague eat them up.
Were they not forced with those that should be
ours,
We might have met them dareful, beard to beard,
And beat them backward home.
A cry within of women.
What is that noise?
SEYTON
It is the cry of women, my good lord.                                 	
He exits.
MACBETH
I have almost forgot the taste of fears.
The time has been my senses would have cooled
To hear a night-shriek, and my fell of hair
Would at a dismal treatise rouse and stir
As life were in ’t. I have supped full with horrors.
Direness, familiar to my slaughterous thoughts,
Cannot once start me.
 
Enter Seyton.
 
Wherefore was that cry?
SEYTON  The Queen, my lord, is dead.
MACBETH  She should have died hereafter.
There would have been a time for such a word.
Tomorrow and tomorrow and tomorrow
Creeps in this petty pace from day to day
To the last syllable of recorded time,
And all our yesterdays have lighted fools
The way to dusty death. Out, out, brief candle!
Life’s but a walking shadow, a poor player
That struts and frets his hour upon the stage
And then is heard no more. It is a tale
Told by an idiot, full of sound and fury,
Signifying nothing.
 
Enter a Messenger.
 
Thou com’st to use thy tongue: thy story quickly.
MESSENGER  Gracious my lord,
I should report that which I say I saw,
But know not how to do ’t.
MACBETH  Well, say, sir.
MESSENGER
As I did stand my watch upon the hill,
I looked toward Birnam, and anon methought
The Wood began to move.
MACBETH  Liar and slave!
MESSENGER
Let me endure your wrath if ’t be not so.
Within this three mile may you see it coming.
I say, a moving grove.
MACBETH  If thou speak’st false,
Upon the next tree shall thou hang alive
Till famine cling thee. If thy speech be sooth,
I care not if thou dost for me as much.—
I pull in resolution and begin
To doubt th’ equivocation of the fiend,
That lies like truth. “Fear not till Birnam Wood
Do come to Dunsinane,” and now a wood
Comes toward Dunsinane.—Arm, arm, and out!—
If this which he avouches does appear,
There is nor flying hence nor tarrying here.
I ’gin to be aweary of the sun
And wish th’ estate o’ th’ world were now
undone.—
Ring the alarum bell!—Blow wind, come wrack,
At least we’ll die with harness on our back.
They exit.
 
Scene 6
Drum and Colors. Enter Malcolm, Siward, Macduff, and
their army, with boughs.
 
MALCOLM
Now near enough. Your leafy screens throw down
And show like those you are.—You, worthy uncle,
Shall with my cousin, your right noble son,
Lead our first battle. Worthy Macduff and we
Shall take upon ’s what else remains to do,
According to our order.
SIWARD  Fare you well.
Do we but find the tyrant’s power tonight,
Let us be beaten if we cannot fight.
MACDUFF
Make all our trumpets speak; give them all breath,
Those clamorous harbingers of blood and death.
They exit.
Alarums continued.
 
Scene 7
Enter Macbeth.
 
MACBETH
They have tied me to a stake. I cannot fly,
But, bear-like, I must fight the course. What’s he
That was not born of woman? Such a one
Am I to fear, or none.
 
Enter young Siward.
 
YOUNG SIWARD  What is thy name?
MACBETH  Thou ’lt be afraid to hear it.
YOUNG SIWARD
No, though thou call’st thyself a hotter name
Than any is in hell.
MACBETH  My name’s Macbeth.
YOUNG SIWARD
The devil himself could not pronounce a title
More hateful to mine ear.
MACBETH  No, nor more fearful.
YOUNG SIWARD
Thou liest, abhorrèd tyrant. With my sword
I’ll prove the lie thou speak’st.
They fight, and young Siward is slain.
MACBETH  Thou wast born of
woman.
But swords I smile at, weapons laugh to scorn,
Brandished by man that’s of a woman born.
He exits.
 
Alarums. Enter Macduff.
 
MACDUFF
That way the noise is. Tyrant, show thy face!
If thou beest slain, and with no stroke of mine,
My wife and children’s ghosts will haunt me still.
I cannot strike at wretched kerns, whose arms
Are hired to bear their staves. Either thou, Macbeth,
Or else my sword with an unbattered edge
I sheathe again undeeded. There thou shouldst be;
By this great clatter, one of greatest note
Seems bruited. Let me find him, Fortune,
And more I beg not.                                             	
He exits. Alarums.
 
Enter Malcolm and Siward.
 
SIWARD
This way, my lord. The castle’s gently rendered.
The tyrant’s people on both sides do fight,
The noble thanes do bravely in the war,
The day almost itself professes yours,
And little is to do.
MALCOLM  We have met with foes
That strike beside us.
SIWARD  Enter, sir, the castle.
They exit. Alarum.
 
Scene 8
Enter Macbeth.
 
MACBETH
Why should I play the Roman fool and die
On mine own sword? Whiles I see lives, the gashes
Do better upon them.
 
Enter Macduff.
 
MACDUFF  Turn, hellhound, turn!
MACBETH
Of all men else I have avoided thee.
But get thee back. My soul is too much charged
With blood of thine already.
MACDUFF  I have no words;
My voice is in my sword, thou bloodier villain
Than terms can give thee out.                                    	
Fight. Alarum.
MACBETH  Thou losest labor.
As easy mayst thou the intrenchant air
With thy keen sword impress as make me bleed.
Let fall thy blade on vulnerable crests;
I bear a charmèd life, which must not yield
To one of woman born.
MACDUFF  Despair thy charm,
And let the angel whom thou still hast served
Tell thee Macduff was from his mother’s womb
Untimely ripped.
MACBETH
Accursèd be that tongue that tells me so,
For it hath cowed my better part of man!
And be these juggling fiends no more believed
That palter with us in a double sense,
That keep the word of promise to our ear
And break it to our hope. I’ll not fight with thee.
MACDUFF  Then yield thee, coward,
And live to be the show and gaze o’ th’ time.
We’ll have thee, as our rarer monsters are,
Painted upon a pole, and underwrit
“Here may you see the tyrant.”
MACBETH  I will not yield
To kiss the ground before young Malcolm’s feet
And to be baited with the rabble’s curse.
Though Birnam Wood be come to Dunsinane
And thou opposed, being of no woman born,
Yet I will try the last. Before my body
I throw my warlike shield. Lay on, Macduff,
And damned be him that first cries “Hold! Enough!”
They exit fighting. Alarums.
 
They enter fighting, and Macbeth is slain. Macduff
exits carrying off Macbeth’s body. Retreat and flourish.
Enter, with Drum and Colors, Malcolm, Siward, Ross,
Thanes, and Soldiers.
 
MALCOLM
I would the friends we miss were safe arrived.
SIWARD
Some must go off; and yet by these I see
So great a day as this is cheaply bought.
MALCOLM
Macduff is missing, and your noble son.
ROSS
Your son, my lord, has paid a soldier’s debt.
He only lived but till he was a man,
The which no sooner had his prowess confirmed
In the unshrinking station where he fought,
But like a man he died.
SIWARD  Then he is dead?
ROSS
Ay, and brought off the field. Your cause of sorrow
Must not be measured by his worth, for then
It hath no end.
SIWARD  Had he his hurts before?
ROSS
Ay, on the front.
SIWARD  Why then, God’s soldier be he!
Had I as many sons as I have hairs,
I would not wish them to a fairer death;
And so his knell is knolled.
MALCOLM
He’s worth more sorrow, and that I’ll spend for
him.
SIWARD  He’s worth no more.
They say he parted well and paid his score,
And so, God be with him. Here comes newer
comfort.
 
Enter Macduff with Macbeth’s head.
 
MACDUFF
Hail, King! for so thou art. Behold where stands
Th’ usurper’s cursèd head. The time is free.
I see thee compassed with thy kingdom’s pearl,
That speak my salutation in their minds,
Whose voices I desire aloud with mine.
Hail, King of Scotland!
ALL  Hail, King of Scotland!                                                 	
Flourish.
MALCOLM
We shall not spend a large expense of time
Before we reckon with your several loves
And make us even with you. My thanes and
kinsmen,
Henceforth be earls, the first that ever Scotland
In such an honor named. What’s more to do,
Which would be planted newly with the time,
As calling home our exiled friends abroad
That fled the snares of watchful tyranny,
Producing forth the cruel ministers
Of this dead butcher and his fiend-like queen
(Who, as ’tis thought, by self and violent hands,
Took off her life)—this, and what needful else
That calls upon us, by the grace of grace,
We will perform in measure, time, and place.
So thanks to all at once and to each one,
Whom we invite to see us crowned at Scone.
Flourish. All exit.
 

A Midsummer Night’s Dream
 
ACT 1
 
Scene 1
Enter Theseus, Hippolyta, and Philostrate, with others.
 
THESEUS
Now, fair Hippolyta, our nuptial hour
Draws on apace. Four happy days bring in
Another moon. But, O, methinks how slow
This old moon wanes! She lingers my desires
Like to a stepdame or a dowager
Long withering out a young man’s revenue.
HIPPOLYTA
Four days will quickly steep themselves in night;
Four nights will quickly dream away the time;
And then the moon, like to a silver bow
New-bent in heaven, shall behold the night
Of our solemnities.
THESEUS  Go, Philostrate,
Stir up the Athenian youth to merriments.
Awake the pert and nimble spirit of mirth.
Turn melancholy forth to funerals;
The pale companion is not for our pomp.
Philostrate exits.
Hippolyta, I wooed thee with my sword
And won thy love doing thee injuries,
But I will wed thee in another key,
With pomp, with triumph, and with reveling.
 
Enter Egeus and his daughter Hermia, and Lysander
 and Demetrius.
 
EGEUS
Happy be Theseus, our renownèd duke!
THESEUS
Thanks, good Egeus. What’s the news with thee?
EGEUS
Full of vexation come I, with complaint
Against my child, my daughter Hermia.—
Stand forth, Demetrius.—My noble lord,
This man hath my consent to marry her.—
Stand forth, Lysander.—And, my gracious duke,
This man hath bewitched the bosom of my child.—
Thou, thou, Lysander, thou hast given her rhymes
And interchanged love tokens with my child.
Thou hast by moonlight at her window sung
With feigning voice verses of feigning love
And stol’n the impression of her fantasy
With bracelets of thy hair, rings, gauds, conceits,
Knacks, trifles, nosegays, sweetmeats—messengers
Of strong prevailment in unhardened youth.
With cunning hast thou filched my daughter’s heart,
Turned her obedience (which is due to me)
To stubborn harshness.—And, my gracious duke,
Be it so she will not here before your Grace
Consent to marry with Demetrius,
I beg the ancient privilege of Athens:
As she is mine, I may dispose of her,
Which shall be either to this gentleman
Or to her death, according to our law
Immediately provided in that case.
THESEUS
What say you, Hermia? Be advised, fair maid.
To you, your father should be as a god,
One that composed your beauties, yea, and one
To whom you are but as a form in wax
By him imprinted, and within his power
To leave the figure or disfigure it.
Demetrius is a worthy gentleman.
HERMIA
So is Lysander.
THESEUS  In himself he is,
But in this kind, wanting your father’s voice,
The other must be held the worthier.
HERMIA
I would my father looked but with my eyes.
THESEUS
Rather your eyes must with his judgment look.
HERMIA
I do entreat your Grace to pardon me.
I know not by what power I am made bold,
Nor how it may concern my modesty
In such a presence here to plead my thoughts;
But I beseech your Grace that I may know
The worst that may befall me in this case
If I refuse to wed Demetrius.
THESEUS
Either to die the death or to abjure
Forever the society of men.
Therefore, fair Hermia, question your desires,
Know of your youth, examine well your blood,
Whether (if you yield not to your father’s choice)
You can endure the livery of a nun,
For aye to be in shady cloister mewed,
To live a barren sister all your life,
Chanting faint hymns to the cold fruitless moon.
Thrice-blessèd they that master so their blood
To undergo such maiden pilgrimage,
But earthlier happy is the rose distilled
Than that which, withering on the virgin thorn,
Grows, lives, and dies in single blessedness.
HERMIA
So will I grow, so live, so die, my lord,
Ere I will yield my virgin patent up
Unto his Lordship whose unwishèd yoke
My soul consents not to give sovereignty.
THESEUS
Take time to pause, and by the next new moon
(The sealing day betwixt my love and me
For everlasting bond of fellowship),
Upon that day either prepare to die
For disobedience to your father’s will,
Or else to wed Demetrius, as he would,
Or on Diana’s altar to protest
For aye austerity and single life.
DEMETRIUS
Relent, sweet Hermia, and, Lysander, yield
Thy crazèd title to my certain right.
LYSANDER
You have her father’s love, Demetrius.
Let me have Hermia’s. Do you marry him.
EGEUS
Scornful Lysander, true, he hath my love;
And what is mine my love shall render him.
And she is mine, and all my right of her
I do estate unto Demetrius.
LYSANDER, to Theseus
I am, my lord, as well derived as he,
As well possessed. My love is more than his;
My fortunes every way as fairly ranked
(If not with vantage) as Demetrius’;
And (which is more than all these boasts can be)
I am beloved of beauteous Hermia.
Why should not I then prosecute my right?
Demetrius, I’ll avouch it to his head,
Made love to Nedar’s daughter, Helena,
And won her soul; and she, sweet lady, dotes,
Devoutly dotes, dotes in idolatry,
Upon this spotted and inconstant man.
THESEUS
I must confess that I have heard so much,
And with Demetrius thought to have spoke thereof;
But, being overfull of self-affairs,
My mind did lose it.—But, Demetrius, come,
And come, Egeus; you shall go with me.
I have some private schooling for you both.—
For you, fair Hermia, look you arm yourself
To fit your fancies to your father’s will,
Or else the law of Athens yields you up
(Which by no means we may extenuate)
To death or to a vow of single life.—
Come, my Hippolyta. What cheer, my love?—
Demetrius and Egeus, go along.
I must employ you in some business
Against our nuptial and confer with you
Of something nearly that concerns yourselves.
EGEUS
With duty and desire we follow you.
All but Hermia and Lysander exit.
LYSANDER
How now, my love? Why is your cheek so pale?
How chance the roses there do fade so fast?
HERMIA
Belike for want of rain, which I could well
Beteem them from the tempest of my eyes.
LYSANDER
Ay me! For aught that I could ever read,
Could ever hear by tale or history,
The course of true love never did run smooth.
But either it was different in blood—
HERMIA
O cross! Too high to be enthralled to low.
LYSANDER
Or else misgraffèd in respect of years—
HERMIA
O spite! Too old to be engaged to young.
LYSANDER
Or else it stood upon the choice of friends—
HERMIA
O hell, to choose love by another’s eyes!
LYSANDER
Or, if there were a sympathy in choice,
War, death, or sickness did lay siege to it,
Making it momentany as a sound,
Swift as a shadow, short as any dream,
Brief as the lightning in the collied night,
That, in a spleen, unfolds both heaven and Earth,
And, ere a man hath power to say “Behold!”
The jaws of darkness do devour it up.
So quick bright things come to confusion.
HERMIA
If then true lovers have been ever crossed,
It stands as an edict in destiny.
Then let us teach our trial patience
Because it is a customary cross,
As due to love as thoughts and dreams and sighs,
Wishes and tears, poor fancy’s followers.
LYSANDER
A good persuasion. Therefore, hear me, Hermia:
I have a widow aunt, a dowager
Of great revenue, and she hath no child.
From Athens is her house remote seven leagues,
And she respects me as her only son.
There, gentle Hermia, may I marry thee;
And to that place the sharp Athenian law
Cannot pursue us. If thou lovest me, then
Steal forth thy father’s house tomorrow night,
And in the wood a league without the town
(Where I did meet thee once with Helena
To do observance to a morn of May),
There will I stay for thee.
HERMIA  My good Lysander,
I swear to thee by Cupid’s strongest bow,
By his best arrow with the golden head,
By the simplicity of Venus’ doves,
By that which knitteth souls and prospers loves,
And by that fire which burned the Carthage queen
When the false Trojan under sail was seen,
By all the vows that ever men have broke
(In number more than ever women spoke),
In that same place thou hast appointed me,
Tomorrow truly will I meet with thee.
LYSANDER
Keep promise, love. Look, here comes Helena.
 
Enter Helena.
 
HERMIA
Godspeed, fair Helena. Whither away?
HELENA
Call you me “fair”? That “fair” again unsay.
Demetrius loves your fair. O happy fair!
Your eyes are lodestars and your tongue’s sweet air
More tunable than lark to shepherd’s ear
When wheat is green, when hawthorn buds appear.
Sickness is catching. O, were favor so!
Yours would I catch, fair Hermia, ere I go.
My ear should catch your voice, my eye your eye;
My tongue should catch your tongue’s sweet
melody.
Were the world mine, Demetrius being bated,
The rest I’d give to be to you translated.
O, teach me how you look and with what art
You sway the motion of Demetrius’ heart!
HERMIA
I frown upon him, yet he loves me still.
HELENA
O, that your frowns would teach my smiles such
skill!
HERMIA
I give him curses, yet he gives me love.
HELENA
O, that my prayers could such affection move!
HERMIA
The more I hate, the more he follows me.
HELENA
The more I love, the more he hateth me.
HERMIA
His folly, Helena, is no fault of mine.
HELENA
None but your beauty. Would that fault were mine!
HERMIA
Take comfort: he no more shall see my face.
Lysander and myself will fly this place.
Before the time I did Lysander see
Seemed Athens as a paradise to me.
O, then, what graces in my love do dwell
That he hath turned a heaven unto a hell!
LYSANDER
Helen, to you our minds we will unfold.
Tomorrow night when Phoebe doth behold
Her silver visage in the wat’ry glass,
Decking with liquid pearl the bladed grass
(A time that lovers’ flights doth still conceal),
Through Athens’ gates have we devised to steal.
HERMIA
And in the wood where often you and I
Upon faint primrose beds were wont to lie,
Emptying our bosoms of their counsel sweet,
There my Lysander and myself shall meet
And thence from Athens turn away our eyes
To seek new friends and stranger companies.
Farewell, sweet playfellow. Pray thou for us,
And good luck grant thee thy Demetrius.—
Keep word, Lysander. We must starve our sight
From lovers’ food till morrow deep midnight.
LYSANDER
I will, my Hermia.                                                        	
Hermia exits.
Helena, adieu.
As you on him, Demetrius dote on you!
Lysander exits.
HELENA
How happy some o’er other some can be!
Through Athens I am thought as fair as she.
But what of that? Demetrius thinks not so.
He will not know what all but he do know.
And, as he errs, doting on Hermia’s eyes,
So I, admiring of his qualities.
Things base and vile, holding no quantity,
Love can transpose to form and dignity.
Love looks not with the eyes but with the mind;
And therefore is winged Cupid painted blind.
Nor hath Love’s mind of any judgment taste.
Wings, and no eyes, figure unheedy haste.
And therefore is Love said to be a child
Because in choice he is so oft beguiled.
As waggish boys in game themselves forswear,
So the boy Love is perjured everywhere.
For, ere Demetrius looked on Hermia’s eyne,
He hailed down oaths that he was only mine;
And when this hail some heat from Hermia felt,
So he dissolved, and show’rs of oaths did melt.
I will go tell him of fair Hermia’s flight.
Then to the wood will he tomorrow night
Pursue her. And, for this intelligence
If I have thanks, it is a dear expense.
But herein mean I to enrich my pain,
To have his sight thither and back again.
She exits.
 
Scene 2
Enter Quince the carpenter, and Snug the joiner, and
Bottom the weaver, and Flute the bellows-mender, and
Snout the tinker, and Starveling the tailor.
 
QUINCE  Is all our company here?
BOTTOM  You were best to call them generally, man by
man, according to the scrip.
QUINCE  Here is the scroll of every man’s name which
is thought fit, through all Athens, to play in our
interlude before the Duke and the Duchess on his
wedding day at night.
BOTTOM  First, good Peter Quince, say what the play
treats on, then read the names of the actors, and so
grow to a point.
QUINCE  Marry, our play is “The most lamentable
comedy and most cruel death of Pyramus and
Thisbe.”
BOTTOM  A very good piece of work, I assure you, and a
merry. Now, good Peter Quince, call forth your
actors by the scroll. Masters, spread yourselves.
QUINCE  Answer as I call you. Nick Bottom, the weaver.
BOTTOM  Ready. Name what part I am for, and
proceed.
QUINCE  You, Nick Bottom, are set down for Pyramus.
BOTTOM  What is Pyramus—a lover or a tyrant?
QUINCE  A lover that kills himself most gallant for love.
BOTTOM  That will ask some tears in the true performing
of it. If I do it, let the audience look to their
eyes. I will move storms; I will condole in some
measure. To the rest.—Yet my chief humor is for a
tyrant. I could play Ercles rarely, or a part to tear a
cat in, to make all split:
 
       	The raging rocks
       	And shivering shocks
       	Shall break the locks
       	   Of prison gates.
       	And Phibbus’ car
       	Shall shine from far
       	And make and mar
       	   The foolish Fates.
 
This was lofty. Now name the rest of the players.
This is Ercles’ vein, a tyrant’s vein. A lover is more
condoling.
QUINCE  Francis Flute, the bellows-mender.
FLUTE  Here, Peter Quince.
QUINCE  Flute, you must take Thisbe on you.
FLUTE  What is Thisbe—a wand’ring knight?
QUINCE  It is the lady that Pyramus must love.
FLUTE  Nay, faith, let not me play a woman. I have a
beard coming.
QUINCE  That’s all one. You shall play it in a mask, and
you may speak as small as you will.
BOTTOM  An I may hide my face, let me play Thisbe too.
I’ll speak in a monstrous little voice: “Thisne,
Thisne!”—“Ah Pyramus, my lover dear! Thy Thisbe
dear and lady dear!”
QUINCE  No, no, you must play Pyramus—and, Flute,
you Thisbe.
BOTTOM  Well, proceed.
QUINCE  Robin Starveling, the tailor.
STARVELING  Here, Peter Quince.
QUINCE  Robin Starveling, you must play Thisbe’s
mother.—Tom Snout, the tinker.
SNOUT  Here, Peter Quince.
QUINCE  You, Pyramus’ father.—Myself, Thisbe’s
father.—Snug the joiner, you the lion’s part.—
And I hope here is a play fitted.
SNUG  Have you the lion’s part written? Pray you, if it
be, give it me, for I am slow of study.
QUINCE  You may do it extempore, for it is nothing but
roaring.
BOTTOM  Let me play the lion too. I will roar that I will
do any man’s heart good to hear me. I will roar that
I will make the Duke say “Let him roar again. Let
him roar again!”
QUINCE  An you should do it too terribly, you would
fright the Duchess and the ladies that they would
shriek, and that were enough to hang us all.
ALL  That would hang us, every mother’s son.
BOTTOM  I grant you, friends, if you should fright the
ladies out of their wits, they would have no more
discretion but to hang us. But I will aggravate my
voice so that I will roar you as gently as any sucking
dove. I will roar you an ’twere any nightingale.
QUINCE  You can play no part but Pyramus, for Pyramus
is a sweet-faced man, a proper man as one
shall see in a summer’s day, a most lovely gentlemanlike
man. Therefore you must needs play
Pyramus.
BOTTOM  Well, I will undertake it. What beard were I
best to play it in?
QUINCE  Why, what you will.
BOTTOM  I will discharge it in either your straw-color
beard, your orange-tawny beard, your purple-in-grain
beard, or your French-crown-color beard,
your perfit yellow.
QUINCE  Some of your French crowns have no hair at
all, and then you will play barefaced. But, masters,
here are your parts, giving out the parts, and I am
to entreat you, request you, and desire you to con
them by tomorrow night and meet me in the palace
wood, a mile without the town, by moonlight. There
will we rehearse, for if we meet in the city, we shall
be dogged with company and our devices known. In
the meantime I will draw a bill of properties such as
our play wants. I pray you fail me not.
BOTTOM  We will meet, and there we may rehearse
most obscenely and courageously. Take pains. Be
perfit. Adieu.
QUINCE  At the Duke’s Oak we meet.
BOTTOM  Enough. Hold or cut bowstrings.
They exit.
 
 
 

 
 
ACT 2
 
Scene 1
Enter a Fairy at one door and Robin Goodfellow at
another.
 
ROBIN
How now, spirit? Whither wander you?
FAIRY
       	Over hill, over dale,
       	   Thorough bush, thorough brier,
       	Over park, over pale,
       	   Thorough flood, thorough fire;
       	I do wander everywhere,
       	Swifter than the moon’s sphere.
       	And I serve the Fairy Queen,
       	To dew her orbs upon the green.
       	The cowslips tall her pensioners be;
       	In their gold coats spots you see;
       	Those be rubies, fairy favors;
       	In those freckles live their savors.
I must go seek some dewdrops here
And hang a pearl in every cowslip’s ear.
Farewell, thou lob of spirits. I’ll be gone.
Our queen and all her elves come here anon.
ROBIN
The King doth keep his revels here tonight.
Take heed the Queen come not within his sight,
For Oberon is passing fell and wrath
Because that she, as her attendant, hath
A lovely boy stolen from an Indian king;
She never had so sweet a changeling.
And jealous Oberon would have the child
Knight of his train, to trace the forests wild.
But she perforce withholds the lovèd boy,
Crowns him with flowers and makes him all her
joy.
And now they never meet in grove or green,
By fountain clear or spangled starlight sheen,
But they do square, that all their elves for fear
Creep into acorn cups and hide them there.
FAIRY
Either I mistake your shape and making quite,
Or else you are that shrewd and knavish sprite
Called Robin Goodfellow. Are not you he
That frights the maidens of the villagery,
Skim milk, and sometimes labor in the quern
And bootless make the breathless huswife churn,
And sometime make the drink to bear no barm,
Mislead night wanderers, laughing at their harm?
Those that “Hobgoblin” call you and “sweet Puck,”
You do their work, and they shall have good luck.
Are not you he?
ROBIN  Thou speakest aright.
I am that merry wanderer of the night.
I jest to Oberon and make him smile
When I a fat and bean-fed horse beguile,
Neighing in likeness of a filly foal.
And sometime lurk I in a gossip’s bowl
In very likeness of a roasted crab,
And, when she drinks, against her lips I bob
And on her withered dewlap pour the ale.
The wisest aunt, telling the saddest tale,
Sometime for three-foot stool mistaketh me;
Then slip I from her bum, down topples she
And “Tailor!” cries and falls into a cough,
And then the whole choir hold their hips and loffe
And waxen in their mirth and neeze and swear
A merrier hour was never wasted there.
But room, fairy. Here comes Oberon.
FAIRY
And here my mistress. Would that he were gone!
 
Enter Oberon the King of Fairies at one door, with his
train, and Titania the Queen at another, with hers.
 
OBERON
Ill met by moonlight, proud Titania.
TITANIA
What, jealous Oberon? Fairies, skip hence.
I have forsworn his bed and company.
OBERON
Tarry, rash wanton. Am not I thy lord?
TITANIA
Then I must be thy lady. But I know
When thou hast stolen away from Fairyland
And in the shape of Corin sat all day
Playing on pipes of corn and versing love
To amorous Phillida. Why art thou here,
Come from the farthest steep of India,
But that, forsooth, the bouncing Amazon,
Your buskined mistress and your warrior love,
To Theseus must be wedded, and you come
To give their bed joy and prosperity?
OBERON
How canst thou thus for shame, Titania,
Glance at my credit with Hippolyta,
Knowing I know thy love to Theseus?
Didst not thou lead him through the glimmering
night
From Perigouna, whom he ravishèd,
And make him with fair Aegles break his faith,
With Ariadne and Antiopa?
TITANIA
These are the forgeries of jealousy;
And never, since the middle summer’s spring,
Met we on hill, in dale, forest, or mead,
By pavèd fountain or by rushy brook,
Or in the beachèd margent of the sea,
To dance our ringlets to the whistling wind,
But with thy brawls thou hast disturbed our sport.
Therefore the winds, piping to us in vain,
As in revenge have sucked up from the sea
Contagious fogs, which, falling in the land,
Hath every pelting river made so proud
That they have overborne their continents.
The ox hath therefore stretched his yoke in vain,
The plowman lost his sweat, and the green corn
Hath rotted ere his youth attained a beard.
The fold stands empty in the drownèd field,
And crows are fatted with the murrain flock.
The nine-men’s-morris is filled up with mud,
And the quaint mazes in the wanton green,
For lack of tread, are undistinguishable.
The human mortals want their winter here.
No night is now with hymn or carol blessed.
Therefore the moon, the governess of floods,
Pale in her anger, washes all the air,
That rheumatic diseases do abound.
And thorough this distemperature we see
The seasons alter: hoary-headed frosts
Fall in the fresh lap of the crimson rose,
And on old Hiems’ thin and icy crown
An odorous chaplet of sweet summer buds
Is, as in mockery, set. The spring, the summer,
The childing autumn, angry winter, change
Their wonted liveries, and the mazèd world
By their increase now knows not which is which.
And this same progeny of evils comes
From our debate, from our dissension;
We are their parents and original.
OBERON
Do you amend it, then. It lies in you.
Why should Titania cross her Oberon?
I do but beg a little changeling boy
To be my henchman.
TITANIA  Set your heart at rest:
The Fairyland buys not the child of me.
His mother was a vot’ress of my order,
And in the spicèd Indian air by night
Full often hath she gossiped by my side
And sat with me on Neptune’s yellow sands,
Marking th’ embarkèd traders on the flood,
When we have laughed to see the sails conceive
And grow big-bellied with the wanton wind;
Which she, with pretty and with swimming gait,
Following (her womb then rich with my young
squire),
Would imitate and sail upon the land
To fetch me trifles and return again,
As from a voyage, rich with merchandise.
But she, being mortal, of that boy did die,
And for her sake do I rear up her boy,
And for her sake I will not part with him.
OBERON
How long within this wood intend you stay?
TITANIA
Perchance till after Theseus’ wedding day.
If you will patiently dance in our round
And see our moonlight revels, go with us.
If not, shun me, and I will spare your haunts.
OBERON
Give me that boy and I will go with thee.
TITANIA
Not for thy fairy kingdom. Fairies, away.
We shall chide downright if I longer stay.
Titania and her fairies exit.
OBERON
Well, go thy way. Thou shalt not from this grove
Till I torment thee for this injury.—
My gentle Puck, come hither. Thou rememb’rest
Since once I sat upon a promontory
And heard a mermaid on a dolphin’s back
Uttering such dulcet and harmonious breath
That the rude sea grew civil at her song
And certain stars shot madly from their spheres
To hear the sea-maid’s music.
ROBIN  I remember.
OBERON
That very time I saw (but thou couldst not),
Flying between the cold moon and the Earth,
Cupid all armed. A certain aim he took
At a fair vestal thronèd by the west,
And loosed his love-shaft smartly from his bow
As it should pierce a hundred thousand hearts.
But I might see young Cupid’s fiery shaft
Quenched in the chaste beams of the wat’ry moon,
And the imperial vot’ress passèd on
In maiden meditation, fancy-free.
Yet marked I where the bolt of Cupid fell.
It fell upon a little western flower,
Before, milk-white, now purple with love’s wound,
And maidens call it “love-in-idleness.”
Fetch me that flower; the herb I showed thee once.
The juice of it on sleeping eyelids laid
Will make or man or woman madly dote
Upon the next live creature that it sees.
Fetch me this herb, and be thou here again
Ere the leviathan can swim a league.
ROBIN
I’ll put a girdle round about the Earth
In forty minutes.                                                                   	
He exits.
OBERON  Having once this juice,
I’ll watch Titania when she is asleep
And drop the liquor of it in her eyes.
The next thing then she, waking, looks upon
(Be it on lion, bear, or wolf, or bull,
On meddling monkey, or on busy ape)
She shall pursue it with the soul of love.
And ere I take this charm from off her sight
(As I can take it with another herb),
I’ll make her render up her page to me.
But who comes here? I am invisible,
And I will overhear their conference.
 
Enter Demetrius, Helena following him.
 
DEMETRIUS
I love thee not; therefore pursue me not.
Where is Lysander and fair Hermia?
The one I’ll stay; the other stayeth me.
Thou told’st me they were stol’n unto this wood,
And here am I, and wood within this wood
Because I cannot meet my Hermia.
Hence, get thee gone, and follow me no more.
HELENA
You draw me, you hard-hearted adamant!
But yet you draw not iron, for my heart
Is true as steel. Leave you your power to draw,
And I shall have no power to follow you.
DEMETRIUS
Do I entice you? Do I speak you fair?
Or rather do I not in plainest truth
Tell you I do not, nor I cannot love you?
HELENA
And even for that do I love you the more.
I am your spaniel, and, Demetrius,
The more you beat me I will fawn on you.
Use me but as your spaniel: spurn me, strike me,
Neglect me, lose me; only give me leave
(Unworthy as I am) to follow you.
What worser place can I beg in your love
(And yet a place of high respect with me)
Than to be usèd as you use your dog?
DEMETRIUS
Tempt not too much the hatred of my spirit,
For I am sick when I do look on thee.
HELENA
And I am sick when I look not on you.
DEMETRIUS
You do impeach your modesty too much
To leave the city and commit yourself
Into the hands of one that loves you not,
To trust the opportunity of night
And the ill counsel of a desert place
With the rich worth of your virginity.
HELENA
Your virtue is my privilege. For that
It is not night when I do see your face,
Therefore I think I am not in the night.
Nor doth this wood lack worlds of company,
For you, in my respect, are all the world.
Then, how can it be said I am alone
When all the world is here to look on me?
DEMETRIUS
I’ll run from thee and hide me in the brakes
And leave thee to the mercy of wild beasts.
HELENA
The wildest hath not such a heart as you.
Run when you will. The story shall be changed:
Apollo flies and Daphne holds the chase;
The dove pursues the griffin; the mild hind
Makes speed to catch the tiger. Bootless speed
When cowardice pursues and valor flies!
DEMETRIUS
I will not stay thy questions. Let me go,
Or if thou follow me, do not believe
But I shall do thee mischief in the wood.
HELENA
Ay, in the temple, in the town, the field,
You do me mischief. Fie, Demetrius!
Your wrongs do set a scandal on my sex.
We cannot fight for love as men may do.
We should be wooed and were not made to woo.
Demetrius exits.
I’ll follow thee and make a heaven of hell
To die upon the hand I love so well.                            	
Helena exits.
OBERON
Fare thee well, nymph. Ere he do leave this grove,
Thou shalt fly him, and he shall seek thy love.
 
Enter Robin.
 
Hast thou the flower there? Welcome, wanderer.
ROBIN
Ay, there it is.
OBERON  I pray thee give it me.
Robin gives him the flower.
I know a bank where the wild thyme blows,
Where oxlips and the nodding violet grows,
Quite overcanopied with luscious woodbine,
With sweet muskroses, and with eglantine.
There sleeps Titania sometime of the night,
Lulled in these flowers with dances and delight.
And there the snake throws her enameled skin,
Weed wide enough to wrap a fairy in.
And with the juice of this I’ll streak her eyes
And make her full of hateful fantasies.
Take thou some of it, and seek through this grove.
He gives Robin part of the flower.
A sweet Athenian lady is in love
With a disdainful youth. Anoint his eyes,
But do it when the next thing he espies
May be the lady. Thou shalt know the man
By the Athenian garments he hath on.
Effect it with some care, that he may prove
More fond on her than she upon her love.
And look thou meet me ere the first cock crow.
ROBIN
Fear not, my lord. Your servant shall do so.
They exit.
 
Scene 2
Enter Titania, Queen of Fairies, with her train.
 
TITANIA
Come, now a roundel and a fairy song;
Then, for the third part of a minute, hence—
Some to kill cankers in the muskrose buds,
Some war with reremice for their leathern wings
To make my small elves coats, and some keep back
The clamorous owl that nightly hoots and wonders
At our quaint spirits. Sing me now asleep.
Then to your offices and let me rest.                         	
She lies down.
 
Fairies sing.
 
FIRST FAIRY
       	You spotted snakes with double tongue,
       	   Thorny hedgehogs, be not seen.
       	Newts and blindworms, do no wrong,
       	   Come not near our Fairy Queen.
CHORUS
       	   Philomel, with melody
       	   Sing in our sweet lullaby.
       	Lulla, lulla, lullaby, lulla, lulla, lullaby.
       	   Never harm
       	   Nor spell nor charm
       	Come our lovely lady nigh.
       	So good night, with lullaby.
FIRST FAIRY
       	Weaving spiders, come not here.
       	   Hence, you long-legged spinners, hence.
       	Beetles black, approach not near.
       	   Worm nor snail, do no offence.
CHORUS
       	   Philomel, with melody
       	   Sing in our sweet lullaby.
       	Lulla, lulla, lullaby, lulla, lulla, lullaby.
       	   Never harm
       	   Nor spell nor charm
       	Come our lovely lady nigh.
       	So good night, with lullaby.
Titania sleeps.
SECOND FAIRY
Hence, away! Now all is well.
One aloof stand sentinel.                                               	 
Fairies exit.
 
Enter Oberon, who anoints Titania’s eyelids with the
nectar.
 
OBERON
       	What thou seest when thou dost wake
       	Do it for thy true love take.
       	Love and languish for his sake.
       	Be it ounce, or cat, or bear,
       	Pard, or boar with bristled hair,
       	In thy eye that shall appear
       	When thou wak’st, it is thy dear.
                                                  	
Wake when some vile thing is near. He exits.
 
Enter Lysander and Hermia.
 
LYSANDER
Fair love, you faint with wand’ring in the wood.
   And, to speak troth, I have forgot our way.
We’ll rest us, Hermia, if you think it good,
   And tarry for the comfort of the day.
HERMIA
Be it so, Lysander. Find you out a bed,
For I upon this bank will rest my head.
LYSANDER
One turf shall serve as pillow for us both;
One heart, one bed, two bosoms, and one troth.
HERMIA
Nay, good Lysander. For my sake, my dear,
Lie further off yet. Do not lie so near.
LYSANDER
O, take the sense, sweet, of my innocence!
Love takes the meaning in love’s conference.
I mean that my heart unto yours is knit,
So that but one heart we can make of it;
Two bosoms interchainèd with an oath—
So then two bosoms and a single troth.
Then by your side no bed-room me deny,
For lying so, Hermia, I do not lie.
HERMIA
Lysander riddles very prettily.
Now much beshrew my manners and my pride
If Hermia meant to say Lysander lied.
But, gentle friend, for love and courtesy,
Lie further off in human modesty.
Such separation, as may well be said,
Becomes a virtuous bachelor and a maid.
So far be distant; and good night, sweet friend.
Thy love ne’er alter till thy sweet life end!
LYSANDER
“Amen, amen” to that fair prayer, say I,
And then end life when I end loyalty!
Here is my bed. Sleep give thee all his rest!
HERMIA
With half that wish the wisher’s eyes be pressed!
They sleep.
 
Enter Robin.
 
ROBIN
       	Through the forest have I gone,
       	But Athenian found I none
       	On whose eyes I might approve
       	This flower’s force in stirring love.
He sees Lysander.
       	Night and silence! Who is here?
       	Weeds of Athens he doth wear.
       	This is he my master said
       	Despisèd the Athenian maid.
       	And here the maiden, sleeping sound
       	On the dank and dirty ground.
       	Pretty soul, she durst not lie
       	Near this lack-love, this kill-courtesy.—
       	Churl, upon thy eyes I throw
       	All the power this charm doth owe.
He anoints Lysander’s eyelids
with the nectar.
       	When thou wak’st, let love forbid
       	Sleep his seat on thy eyelid.
       	So, awake when I am gone,
                                                                 	
For I must now to Oberon. He exits.
 
Enter Demetrius and Helena, running.
 
HELENA
Stay, though thou kill me, sweet Demetrius.
DEMETRIUS
I charge thee, hence, and do not haunt me thus.
HELENA
O, wilt thou darkling leave me? Do not so.
DEMETRIUS
Stay, on thy peril. I alone will go.                           	
Demetrius exits.
HELENA
O, I am out of breath in this fond chase.
The more my prayer, the lesser is my grace.
Happy is Hermia, wheresoe’er she lies,
For she hath blessèd and attractive eyes.
How came her eyes so bright? Not with salt tears.
If so, my eyes are oftener washed than hers.
No, no, I am as ugly as a bear,
For beasts that meet me run away for fear.
Therefore no marvel though Demetrius
Do as a monster fly my presence thus.
What wicked and dissembling glass of mine
Made me compare with Hermia’s sphery eyne?
But who is here? Lysander, on the ground!
Dead or asleep? I see no blood, no wound.—
Lysander, if you live, good sir, awake.
LYSANDER, waking up
And run through fire I will for thy sweet sake.
Transparent Helena! Nature shows art,
That through thy bosom makes me see thy heart.
Where is Demetrius? O, how fit a word
Is that vile name to perish on my sword!
HELENA
Do not say so. Lysander, say not so.
What though he love your Hermia? Lord, what
though?
Yet Hermia still loves you. Then be content.
LYSANDER
Content with Hermia? No, I do repent
The tedious minutes I with her have spent.
Not Hermia, but Helena I love.
Who will not change a raven for a dove?
The will of man is by his reason swayed,
And reason says you are the worthier maid.
Things growing are not ripe until their season;
So I, being young, till now ripe not to reason.
And touching now the point of human skill,
Reason becomes the marshal to my will
And leads me to your eyes, where I o’erlook
Love’s stories written in love’s richest book.
HELENA
Wherefore was I to this keen mockery born?
When at your hands did I deserve this scorn?
Is ’t not enough, is ’t not enough, young man,
That I did never, no, nor never can
Deserve a sweet look from Demetrius’ eye,
But you must flout my insufficiency?
Good troth, you do me wrong, good sooth, you do,
In such disdainful manner me to woo.
But fare you well. Perforce I must confess
I thought you lord of more true gentleness.
O, that a lady of one man refused
Should of another therefore be abused!                             	
She exits.
LYSANDER
She sees not Hermia.—Hermia, sleep thou there,
And never mayst thou come Lysander near.
For, as a surfeit of the sweetest things
The deepest loathing to the stomach brings,
Or as the heresies that men do leave
Are hated most of those they did deceive,
So thou, my surfeit and my heresy,
Of all be hated, but the most of me!
And, all my powers, address your love and might
To honor Helen and to be her knight.                                  	
He exits.
HERMIA, waking up
Help me, Lysander, help me! Do thy best
To pluck this crawling serpent from my breast.
Ay me, for pity! What a dream was here!
Lysander, look how I do quake with fear.
Methought a serpent ate my heart away,
And you sat smiling at his cruel prey.
Lysander! What, removed? Lysander, lord!
What, out of hearing? Gone? No sound, no word?
Alack, where are you? Speak, an if you hear.
Speak, of all loves! I swoon almost with fear.—
No? Then I well perceive you are not nigh.
Either death or you I’ll find immediately.
She exits.
 
 
 

 
 
ACT 3
 
Scene 1
With Titania still asleep onstage, enter the Clowns,
Bottom, Quince, Snout, Starveling, Snug, and Flute.
 
BOTTOM  Are we all met?
QUINCE  Pat, pat. And here’s a marvels convenient
place for our rehearsal. This green plot shall be
our stage, this hawthorn brake our tiring-house,
and we will do it in action as we will do it before
the Duke.
BOTTOM  Peter Quince?
QUINCE  What sayest thou, bully Bottom?
BOTTOM  There are things in this comedy of Pyramus
and Thisbe that will never please. First, Pyramus
must draw a sword to kill himself, which the ladies
cannot abide. How answer you that?
SNOUT  By ’r lakin, a parlous fear.
STARVELING  I believe we must leave the killing out,
when all is done.
BOTTOM  Not a whit! I have a device to make all well.
Write me a prologue, and let the prologue seem to
say we will do no harm with our swords and that
Pyramus is not killed indeed. And, for the more
better assurance, tell them that I, Pyramus, am not
Pyramus, but Bottom the weaver. This will put them
out of fear.
QUINCE  Well, we will have such a prologue, and it shall
be written in eight and six.
BOTTOM  No, make it two more. Let it be written in
eight and eight.
SNOUT  Will not the ladies be afeard of the lion?
STARVELING  I fear it, I promise you.
BOTTOM  Masters, you ought to consider with yourself,
to bring in (God shield us!) a lion among ladies is a
most dreadful thing. For there is not a more fearful
wildfowl than your lion living, and we ought to look
to ’t.
SNOUT  Therefore another prologue must tell he is not
a lion.
BOTTOM  Nay, you must name his name, and half his
face must be seen through the lion’s neck, and he
himself must speak through, saying thus, or to the
same defect: “Ladies,” or “Fair ladies, I would
wish you,” or “I would request you,” or “I would
entreat you not to fear, not to tremble! My life for
yours. If you think I come hither as a lion, it were
pity of my life. No, I am no such thing. I am a man as
other men are.” And there indeed let him name his
name and tell them plainly he is Snug the joiner.
QUINCE  Well, it shall be so. But there is two hard
things: that is, to bring the moonlight into a chamber,
for you know Pyramus and Thisbe meet by
moonlight.
SNOUT  Doth the moon shine that night we play our
play?
BOTTOM  A calendar, a calendar! Look in the almanac.
Find out moonshine, find out moonshine.
Quince takes out a book.
QUINCE  Yes, it doth shine that night.
BOTTOM  Why, then, may you leave a casement of the
great chamber window, where we play, open, and
the moon may shine in at the casement.
QUINCE  Ay, or else one must come in with a bush of
thorns and a lantern and say he comes to disfigure
or to present the person of Moonshine. Then there
is another thing: we must have a wall in the great
chamber, for Pyramus and Thisbe, says the story,
did talk through the chink of a wall.
SNOUT  You can never bring in a wall. What say you,
Bottom?
BOTTOM  Some man or other must present Wall. And
let him have some plaster, or some loam, or some
roughcast about him to signify wall, or let him
hold his fingers thus, and through that cranny shall
Pyramus and Thisbe whisper.
QUINCE  If that may be, then all is well. Come, sit down,
every mother’s son, and rehearse your parts. Pyramus,
you begin. When you have spoken your
speech, enter into that brake, and so everyone
according to his cue.
 
Enter Robin invisible to those onstage.
 
ROBIN, aside
What hempen homespuns have we swagg’ring here
So near the cradle of the Fairy Queen?
What, a play toward? I’ll be an auditor—
An actor too perhaps, if I see cause.
QUINCE  Speak, Pyramus.—Thisbe, stand forth.
BOTTOM, as Pyramus
       	Thisbe, the flowers of odious savors sweet—
QUINCE  Odors, odors!
BOTTOM, as Pyramus
                      	…odors savors sweet.
       	So hath thy breath, my dearest Thisbe dear.—
       	But hark, a voice! Stay thou but here awhile,
                                                  	And by and by I will to thee appear. He exits.
ROBIN, aside
A stranger Pyramus than e’er played here.                         	
He exits.
FLUTE  Must I speak now?
QUINCE  Ay, marry, must you, for you must understand
he goes but to see a noise that he heard and is to
come again.
FLUTE, as Thisbe
       	Most radiant Pyramus, most lily-white of hue,
       	Of color like the red rose on triumphant brier,
       	Most brisky juvenal and eke most lovely Jew,
       	As true as truest horse, that yet would never tire.
       	I’ll meet thee, Pyramus, at Ninny’s tomb.
QUINCE  “Ninus’ tomb,” man! Why, you must not
speak that yet. That you answer to Pyramus. You
speak all your part at once, cues and all.—Pyramus,
enter. Your cue is past. It is “never tire.”
FLUTE  O!
As Thisbe. As true as truest horse, that yet would never
tire.
 
Enter Robin, and Bottom as Pyramus with the
ass-head.
 
BOTTOM, as Pyramus
       	If I were fair, fair Thisbe, I were only thine.
QUINCE  O monstrous! O strange! We are haunted. Pray,
masters, fly, masters! Help!
Quince, Flute, Snout, Snug, and Starveling exit.
ROBIN
I’ll follow you. I’ll lead you about a round,
   Through bog, through bush, through brake,
   through brier.
Sometime a horse I’ll be, sometime a hound,
   A hog, a headless bear, sometime a fire,
And neigh and bark and grunt and roar and burn,
Like horse, hound, hog, bear, fire, at every turn.
He exits.
BOTTOM  Why do they run away? This is a knavery of
them to make me afeard.
 
Enter Snout.
 
SNOUT  O Bottom, thou art changed! What do I see on
thee?
BOTTOM  What do you see? You see an ass-head of your
own, do you?                                                                 	
Snout exits.
 
Enter Quince.
 
QUINCE  Bless thee, Bottom, bless thee! Thou art
translated!                                                                           	
He exits.
BOTTOM  I see their knavery. This is to make an ass of
me, to fright me, if they could. But I will not stir
from this place, do what they can. I will walk up
and down here, and I will sing, that they shall hear
I am not afraid.
He sings.      	The ouzel cock, so black of hue,
       	   With orange-tawny bill,
       	The throstle with his note so true,
       	   The wren with little quill—
TITANIA, waking up
What angel wakes me from my flow’ry bed?
BOTTOM sings
       	The finch, the sparrow, and the lark,
       	   The plainsong cuckoo gray,
       	Whose note full many a man doth mark
       	   And dares not answer “nay”—
for, indeed, who would set his wit to so foolish a
bird? Who would give a bird the lie though he cry
“cuckoo” never so?
TITANIA
I pray thee, gentle mortal, sing again.
Mine ear is much enamored of thy note,
So is mine eye enthrallèd to thy shape,
And thy fair virtue’s force perforce doth move me
On the first view to say, to swear, I love thee.
BOTTOM  Methinks, mistress, you should have little
reason for that. And yet, to say the truth, reason
and love keep little company together nowadays.
The more the pity that some honest neighbors will
not make them friends. Nay, I can gleek upon
occasion.
TITANIA
Thou art as wise as thou art beautiful.
BOTTOM  Not so neither; but if I had wit enough to get
out of this wood, I have enough to serve mine own
turn.
TITANIA
Out of this wood do not desire to go.
Thou shalt remain here whether thou wilt or no.
I am a spirit of no common rate.
The summer still doth tend upon my state,
And I do love thee. Therefore go with me.
I’ll give thee fairies to attend on thee,
And they shall fetch thee jewels from the deep
And sing while thou on pressèd flowers dost sleep.
And I will purge thy mortal grossness so
That thou shalt like an airy spirit go.—
Peaseblossom, Cobweb, Mote, and Mustardseed!
 
Enter four Fairies: Peaseblossom, Cobweb,
Mote, and Mustardseed.
 
PEASEBLOSSOM  Ready.
COBWEB  And I.
MOTE  And I.
MUSTARDSEED  And I.
ALL  Where shall we go?
TITANIA
Be kind and courteous to this gentleman.
Hop in his walks and gambol in his eyes;
Feed him with apricocks and dewberries,
With purple grapes, green figs, and mulberries;
The honey-bags steal from the humble-bees,
And for night-tapers crop their waxen thighs
And light them at the fiery glowworms’ eyes
To have my love to bed and to arise;
And pluck the wings from painted butterflies
To fan the moonbeams from his sleeping eyes.
Nod to him, elves, and do him courtesies.
PEASEBLOSSOM  Hail, mortal!
COBWEB  Hail!
MOTE  Hail!
MUSTARDSEED  Hail!
BOTTOM  I cry your Worships mercy, heartily.—I beseech
your Worship’s name.
COBWEB  Cobweb.
BOTTOM  I shall desire you of more acquaintance, good
Master Cobweb. If I cut my finger, I shall make
bold with you.—Your name, honest gentleman?
PEASEBLOSSOM  Peaseblossom.
BOTTOM  I pray you, commend me to Mistress Squash,
your mother, and to Master Peascod, your father.
Good Master Peaseblossom, I shall desire you of
more acquaintance too.—Your name, I beseech
you, sir?
MUSTARDSEED  Mustardseed.
BOTTOM  Good Master Mustardseed, I know your patience
well. That same cowardly, giantlike ox-beef
hath devoured many a gentleman of your house. I
promise you, your kindred hath made my eyes
water ere now. I desire you of more acquaintance,
good Master Mustardseed.
TITANIA
Come, wait upon him. Lead him to my bower.
   The moon, methinks, looks with a wat’ry eye,
And when she weeps, weeps every little flower,
   Lamenting some enforcèd chastity.
Tie up my lover’s tongue. Bring him silently.
They exit.
 
Scene 2
Enter Oberon, King of Fairies.
 
OBERON
I wonder if Titania be awaked;
Then what it was that next came in her eye,
Which she must dote on in extremity.
 
Enter Robin Goodfellow.
 
Here comes my messenger. How now, mad spirit?
What night-rule now about this haunted grove?
ROBIN
My mistress with a monster is in love.
Near to her close and consecrated bower,
While she was in her dull and sleeping hour,
A crew of patches, rude mechanicals,
That work for bread upon Athenian stalls,
Were met together to rehearse a play
Intended for great Theseus’ nuptial day.
The shallowest thick-skin of that barren sort,
Who Pyramus presented in their sport,
Forsook his scene and entered in a brake.
When I did him at this advantage take,
An ass’s noll I fixèd on his head.
Anon his Thisbe must be answerèd,
And forth my mimic comes. When they him spy,
As wild geese that the creeping fowler eye,
Or russet-pated choughs, many in sort,
Rising and cawing at the gun’s report,
Sever themselves and madly sweep the sky,
So at his sight away his fellows fly,
And, at our stamp, here o’er and o’er one falls.
He “Murder” cries and help from Athens calls.
Their sense thus weak, lost with their fears thus
strong,
Made senseless things begin to do them wrong;
For briers and thorns at their apparel snatch,
Some sleeves, some hats, from yielders all things
catch.
I led them on in this distracted fear
And left sweet Pyramus translated there.
When in that moment, so it came to pass,
Titania waked and straightway loved an ass.
OBERON
This falls out better than I could devise.
But hast thou yet latched the Athenian’s eyes
With the love juice, as I did bid thee do?
ROBIN
I took him sleeping—that is finished, too—
And the Athenian woman by his side,
That, when he waked, of force she must be eyed.
 
Enter Demetrius and Hermia.
 
OBERON
Stand close. This is the same Athenian.
ROBIN
This is the woman, but not this the man.
They step aside.
DEMETRIUS
O, why rebuke you him that loves you so?
Lay breath so bitter on your bitter foe!
HERMIA
Now I but chide, but I should use thee worse,
For thou, I fear, hast given me cause to curse.
If thou hast slain Lysander in his sleep,
Being o’er shoes in blood, plunge in the deep
And kill me too.
The sun was not so true unto the day
As he to me. Would he have stolen away
From sleeping Hermia? I’ll believe as soon
This whole Earth may be bored, and that the moon
May through the center creep and so displease
Her brother’s noontide with th’ Antipodes.
It cannot be but thou hast murdered him.
So should a murderer look, so dead, so grim.
DEMETRIUS
So should the murdered look, and so should I,
Pierced through the heart with your stern cruelty.
Yet you, the murderer, look as bright, as clear,
As yonder Venus in her glimmering sphere.
HERMIA
What’s this to my Lysander? Where is he?
Ah, good Demetrius, wilt thou give him me?
DEMETRIUS
I had rather give his carcass to my hounds.
HERMIA
Out, dog! Out, cur! Thou driv’st me past the bounds
Of maiden’s patience. Hast thou slain him, then?
Henceforth be never numbered among men.
O, once tell true! Tell true, even for my sake!
Durst thou have looked upon him, being awake?
And hast thou killed him sleeping? O brave touch!
Could not a worm, an adder, do so much?
An adder did it, for with doubler tongue
Than thine, thou serpent, never adder stung.
DEMETRIUS
You spend your passion on a misprised mood.
I am not guilty of Lysander’s blood,
Nor is he dead, for aught that I can tell.
HERMIA
I pray thee, tell me then that he is well.
DEMETRIUS
An if I could, what should I get therefor?
HERMIA
A privilege never to see me more.
And from thy hated presence part I so.
See me no more, whether he be dead or no.
She exits.
DEMETRIUS
There is no following her in this fierce vein.
Here, therefore, for a while I will remain.
So sorrow’s heaviness doth heavier grow
For debt that bankrout sleep doth sorrow owe,
Which now in some slight measure it will pay,
If for his tender here I make some stay.
He lies down and falls asleep.
OBERON, to Robin
What hast thou done? Thou hast mistaken quite
And laid the love juice on some true-love’s sight.
Of thy misprision must perforce ensue
Some true-love turned, and not a false turned true.
ROBIN
Then fate o’errules, that, one man holding troth,
A million fail, confounding oath on oath.
OBERON
About the wood go swifter than the wind,
And Helena of Athens look thou find.
All fancy-sick she is and pale of cheer
With sighs of love that costs the fresh blood dear.
By some illusion see thou bring her here.
I’ll charm his eyes against she do appear.
ROBIN  I go, I go, look how I go,
Swifter than arrow from the Tartar’s bow.                         	
He exits.
OBERON, applying the nectar to Demetrius’ eyes
       	Flower of this purple dye,
       	Hit with Cupid’s archery,
       	Sink in apple of his eye.
       	When his love he doth espy,
       	Let her shine as gloriously
       	As the Venus of the sky.—
       	When thou wak’st, if she be by,
       	Beg of her for remedy.
 
Enter Robin.
 
ROBIN
       	Captain of our fairy band,
       	Helena is here at hand,
       	And the youth, mistook by me,
       	Pleading for a lover’s fee.
       	Shall we their fond pageant see?
       	Lord, what fools these mortals be!
OBERON
       	Stand aside. The noise they make
       	Will cause Demetrius to awake.
ROBIN
       	Then will two at once woo one.
       	That must needs be sport alone.
       	And those things do best please me
       	That befall prepost’rously.
They step aside.
 
Enter Lysander and Helena.
 
LYSANDER
Why should you think that I should woo in scorn?
   Scorn and derision never come in tears.
Look when I vow, I weep; and vows so born,
   In their nativity all truth appears.
How can these things in me seem scorn to you,
Bearing the badge of faith to prove them true?
HELENA
You do advance your cunning more and more.
   When truth kills truth, O devilish holy fray!
These vows are Hermia’s. Will you give her o’er?
   Weigh oath with oath and you will nothing
   weigh.
Your vows to her and me, put in two scales,
Will even weigh, and both as light as tales.
LYSANDER
I had no judgment when to her I swore.
HELENA
Nor none, in my mind, now you give her o’er.
LYSANDER
Demetrius loves her, and he loves not you.
DEMETRIUS, waking up
O Helen, goddess, nymph, perfect, divine!
To what, my love, shall I compare thine eyne?
Crystal is muddy. O, how ripe in show
Thy lips, those kissing cherries, tempting grow!
That pure congealèd white, high Taurus’ snow,
Fanned with the eastern wind, turns to a crow
When thou hold’st up thy hand. O, let me kiss
This princess of pure white, this seal of bliss!
HELENA
O spite! O hell! I see you all are bent
To set against me for your merriment.
If you were civil and knew courtesy,
You would not do me thus much injury.
Can you not hate me, as I know you do,
But you must join in souls to mock me too?
If you were men, as men you are in show,
You would not use a gentle lady so,
To vow and swear and superpraise my parts,
When, I am sure, you hate me with your hearts.
You both are rivals and love Hermia,
And now both rivals to mock Helena.
A trim exploit, a manly enterprise,
To conjure tears up in a poor maid’s eyes
With your derision! None of noble sort
Would so offend a virgin and extort
A poor soul’s patience, all to make you sport.
LYSANDER
You are unkind, Demetrius. Be not so,
For you love Hermia; this you know I know.
And here with all goodwill, with all my heart,
In Hermia’s love I yield you up my part.
And yours of Helena to me bequeath,
Whom I do love and will do till my death.
HELENA
Never did mockers waste more idle breath.
DEMETRIUS
Lysander, keep thy Hermia. I will none.
If e’er I loved her, all that love is gone.
My heart to her but as guest-wise sojourned,
And now to Helen is it home returned,
There to remain.
LYSANDER  Helen, it is not so.
DEMETRIUS
Disparage not the faith thou dost not know,
Lest to thy peril thou aby it dear.
Look where thy love comes. Yonder is thy dear.
 
Enter Hermia.
 
HERMIA, to Lysander
Dark night, that from the eye his function takes,
The ear more quick of apprehension makes;
Wherein it doth impair the seeing sense,
It pays the hearing double recompense.
Thou art not by mine eye, Lysander, found;
Mine ear, I thank it, brought me to thy sound.
But why unkindly didst thou leave me so?
LYSANDER
Why should he stay whom love doth press to go?
HERMIA
What love could press Lysander from my side?
LYSANDER
Lysander’s love, that would not let him bide,
Fair Helena, who more engilds the night
Than all yon fiery oes and eyes of light.
Why seek’st thou me? Could not this make thee
know
The hate I bear thee made me leave thee so?
HERMIA
You speak not as you think. It cannot be.
HELENA
Lo, she is one of this confederacy!
Now I perceive they have conjoined all three
To fashion this false sport in spite of me.—
Injurious Hermia, most ungrateful maid,
Have you conspired, have you with these contrived,
To bait me with this foul derision?
Is all the counsel that we two have shared,
The sisters’ vows, the hours that we have spent
When we have chid the hasty-footed time
For parting us—O, is all forgot?
All schooldays’ friendship, childhood innocence?
We, Hermia, like two artificial gods,
Have with our needles created both one flower,
Both on one sampler, sitting on one cushion,
Both warbling of one song, both in one key,
As if our hands, our sides, voices, and minds
Had been incorporate. So we grew together
Like to a double cherry, seeming parted,
But yet an union in partition,
Two lovely berries molded on one stem;
So with two seeming bodies but one heart,
Two of the first, like coats in heraldry,
Due but to one, and crownèd with one crest.
And will you rent our ancient love asunder,
To join with men in scorning your poor friend?
It is not friendly; ’tis not maidenly.
Our sex, as well as I, may chide you for it,
Though I alone do feel the injury.
HERMIA
I am amazèd at your words.
I scorn you not. It seems that you scorn me.
HELENA
Have you not set Lysander, as in scorn,
To follow me and praise my eyes and face,
And made your other love, Demetrius,
Who even but now did spurn me with his foot,
To call me goddess, nymph, divine and rare,
Precious, celestial? Wherefore speaks he this
To her he hates? And wherefore doth Lysander
Deny your love (so rich within his soul)
And tender me, forsooth, affection,
But by your setting on, by your consent?
What though I be not so in grace as you,
So hung upon with love, so fortunate,
But miserable most, to love unloved?
This you should pity rather than despise.
HERMIA
I understand not what you mean by this.
HELENA
Ay, do. Persever, counterfeit sad looks,
Make mouths upon me when I turn my back,
Wink each at other, hold the sweet jest up.
This sport, well carried, shall be chronicled.
If you have any pity, grace, or manners,
You would not make me such an argument.
But fare you well. ’Tis partly my own fault,
Which death or absence soon shall remedy.
LYSANDER
Stay, gentle Helena. Hear my excuse,
My love, my life, my soul, fair Helena.
HELENA
O excellent!
HERMIA, to Lysander
Sweet, do not scorn her so.
DEMETRIUS, to Lysander
If she cannot entreat, I can compel.
LYSANDER
Thou canst compel no more than she entreat.
Thy threats have no more strength than her weak
prayers.—
Helen, I love thee. By my life, I do.
I swear by that which I will lose for thee,
To prove him false that says I love thee not.
DEMETRIUS
I say I love thee more than he can do.
LYSANDER
If thou say so, withdraw and prove it too.
DEMETRIUS
Quick, come.
HERMIA  Lysander, whereto tends all this?
She takes hold of Lysander.
LYSANDER
Away, you Ethiop!
DEMETRIUS, to Hermia
No, no. He’ll
Seem to break loose. To Lysander. Take on as you
would follow,
But yet come not. You are a tame man, go!
LYSANDER, to Hermia
Hang off, thou cat, thou burr! Vile thing, let loose,
Or I will shake thee from me like a serpent.
HERMIA
Why are you grown so rude? What change is this,
Sweet love?
LYSANDER  Thy love? Out, tawny Tartar, out!
Out, loathèd med’cine! O, hated potion, hence!
HERMIA
Do you not jest?
HELENA  Yes, sooth, and so do you.
LYSANDER
Demetrius, I will keep my word with thee.
DEMETRIUS
I would I had your bond. For I perceive
A weak bond holds you. I’ll not trust your word.
LYSANDER
What? Should I hurt her, strike her, kill her dead?
Although I hate her, I’ll not harm her so.
HERMIA
What, can you do me greater harm than hate?
Hate me? Wherefore? O me, what news, my love?
Am not I Hermia? Are not you Lysander?
I am as fair now as I was erewhile.
Since night you loved me; yet since night you left
me.
Why, then, you left me—O, the gods forbid!—
In earnest, shall I say?
LYSANDER  Ay, by my life,
And never did desire to see thee more.
Therefore be out of hope, of question, of doubt.
Be certain, nothing truer, ’tis no jest
That I do hate thee and love Helena.
Hermia turns him loose.
HERMIA
O me! To Helena. You juggler, you cankerblossom,
You thief of love! What, have you come by night
And stol’n my love’s heart from him?
HELENA  Fine, i’ faith.
Have you no modesty, no maiden shame,
No touch of bashfulness? What, will you tear
Impatient answers from my gentle tongue?
Fie, fie, you counterfeit, you puppet, you!
HERMIA
“Puppet”? Why so? Ay, that way goes the game.
Now I perceive that she hath made compare
Between our statures; she hath urged her height,
And with her personage, her tall personage,
Her height, forsooth, she hath prevailed with him.
And are you grown so high in his esteem
Because I am so dwarfish and so low?
How low am I, thou painted maypole? Speak!
How low am I? I am not yet so low
But that my nails can reach unto thine eyes.
HELENA
I pray you, though you mock me, gentlemen,
Let her not hurt me. I was never curst;
I have no gift at all in shrewishness.
I am a right maid for my cowardice.
Let her not strike me. You perhaps may think,
Because she is something lower than myself,
That I can match her.
HERMIA  “Lower”? Hark, again!
HELENA
Good Hermia, do not be so bitter with me.
I evermore did love you, Hermia,
Did ever keep your counsels, never wronged you—
Save that, in love unto Demetrius,
I told him of your stealth unto this wood.
He followed you; for love, I followed him.
But he hath chid me hence and threatened me
To strike me, spurn me, nay, to kill me too.
And now, so you will let me quiet go,
To Athens will I bear my folly back
And follow you no further. Let me go.
You see how simple and how fond I am.
HERMIA
Why, get you gone. Who is ’t that hinders you?
HELENA
A foolish heart that I leave here behind.
HERMIA
What, with Lysander?
HELENA  With Demetrius.
LYSANDER
Be not afraid. She shall not harm thee, Helena.
DEMETRIUS
No, sir, she shall not, though you take her part.
HELENA
O, when she is angry, she is keen and shrewd.
She was a vixen when she went to school,
And though she be but little, she is fierce.
HERMIA
“Little” again? Nothing but “low” and “little”?
Why will you suffer her to flout me thus?
Let me come to her.
LYSANDER  Get you gone, you dwarf,
You minimus of hind’ring knotgrass made,
You bead, you acorn—
DEMETRIUS  You are too officious
In her behalf that scorns your services.
Let her alone. Speak not of Helena.
Take not her part. For if thou dost intend
Never so little show of love to her,
Thou shalt aby it.
LYSANDER  Now she holds me not.
Now follow, if thou dar’st, to try whose right,
Of thine or mine, is most in Helena.
DEMETRIUS
“Follow”? Nay, I’ll go with thee, cheek by jowl.
Demetrius and Lysander exit.
HERMIA
You, mistress, all this coil is long of you.
Helena retreats.
Nay, go not back.
HELENA  I will not trust you, I,
Nor longer stay in your curst company.
Your hands than mine are quicker for a fray.
My legs are longer though, to run away.                           	
She exits.
HERMIA
I am amazed and know not what to say.                            	
She exits.
OBERON, to Robin
This is thy negligence. Still thou mistak’st,
Or else committ’st thy knaveries willfully.
ROBIN
Believe me, king of shadows, I mistook.
Did not you tell me I should know the man
By the Athenian garments he had on?
And so far blameless proves my enterprise
That I have ’nointed an Athenian’s eyes;
And so far am I glad it so did sort,
As this their jangling I esteem a sport.
OBERON
Thou seest these lovers seek a place to fight.
Hie, therefore, Robin, overcast the night;
The starry welkin cover thou anon
With drooping fog as black as Acheron,
And lead these testy rivals so astray
As one come not within another’s way.
Like to Lysander sometime frame thy tongue;
Then stir Demetrius up with bitter wrong.
And sometime rail thou like Demetrius.
And from each other look thou lead them thus,
Till o’er their brows death-counterfeiting sleep
With leaden legs and batty wings doth creep.
Then crush this herb into Lysander’s eye,
He gives a flower to Robin.
Whose liquor hath this virtuous property,
To take from thence all error with his might
And make his eyeballs roll with wonted sight.
When they next wake, all this derision
Shall seem a dream and fruitless vision.
And back to Athens shall the lovers wend,
With league whose date till death shall never end.
Whiles I in this affair do thee employ,
I’ll to my queen and beg her Indian boy;
And then I will her charmèd eye release
From monster’s view, and all things shall be peace.
ROBIN
My fairy lord, this must be done with haste,
For night’s swift dragons cut the clouds full fast,
And yonder shines Aurora’s harbinger,
At whose approach, ghosts wand’ring here and
there
Troop home to churchyards. Damnèd spirits all,
That in crossways and floods have burial,
Already to their wormy beds are gone.
For fear lest day should look their shames upon,
They willfully themselves exile from light
And must for aye consort with black-browed night.
OBERON
But we are spirits of another sort.
I with the Morning’s love have oft made sport
And, like a forester, the groves may tread
Even till the eastern gate, all fiery red,
Opening on Neptune with fair blessèd beams,
Turns into yellow gold his salt-green streams.
But notwithstanding, haste! Make no delay.
We may effect this business yet ere day.                            	
He exits.
ROBIN
       	Up and down, up and down,
       	I will lead them up and down.
       	I am feared in field and town.
       	Goblin, lead them up and down.
Here comes one.
 
Enter Lysander.
 
LYSANDER
Where art thou, proud Demetrius? Speak thou now.
ROBIN, in Demetrius’ voice
Here, villain, drawn and ready. Where art thou?
LYSANDER  I will be with thee straight.
ROBIN, in Demetrius’ voice  Follow me, then, to
plainer ground.                                                           	
Lysander exits.
 
Enter Demetrius.
 
DEMETRIUS  Lysander, speak again.
Thou runaway, thou coward, art thou fled?
Speak! In some bush? Where dost thou hide thy
head?
ROBIN, in Lysander’s voice
Thou coward, art thou bragging to the stars,
Telling the bushes that thou look’st for wars,
And wilt not come? Come, recreant! Come, thou
child!
I’ll whip thee with a rod. He is defiled
That draws a sword on thee.
DEMETRIUS  Yea, art thou there?
ROBIN, in Lysander’s voice
Follow my voice. We’ll try no manhood here.
They exit.
 
Enter Lysander.
 
LYSANDER
He goes before me and still dares me on.
When I come where he calls, then he is gone.
The villain is much lighter-heeled than I.
I followed fast, but faster he did fly,
That fallen am I in dark uneven way,
And here will rest me. Come, thou gentle day,
For if but once thou show me thy gray light,
I’ll find Demetrius and revenge this spite.
He lies down and sleeps.
 
Enter Robin and Demetrius.
 
ROBIN, in Lysander’s voice
Ho, ho, ho! Coward, why com’st thou not?
DEMETRIUS
Abide me, if thou dar’st, for well I wot
Thou runn’st before me, shifting every place,
And dar’st not stand nor look me in the face.
Where art thou now?
ROBIN, in Lysander’s voice
Come hither. I am here.
DEMETRIUS
Nay, then, thou mock’st me. Thou shalt buy this
dear
If ever I thy face by daylight see.
Now go thy way. Faintness constraineth me
To measure out my length on this cold bed.
By day’s approach look to be visited.
He lies down and sleeps.
 
Enter Helena.
 
HELENA
O weary night, O long and tedious night,
   Abate thy hours! Shine, comforts, from the east,
That I may back to Athens by daylight
   From these that my poor company detest.
And sleep, that sometimes shuts up sorrow’s eye,
Steal me awhile from mine own company.
She lies down and sleeps.
ROBIN
       	Yet but three? Come one more.
       	Two of both kinds makes up four.
       	Here she comes, curst and sad.
       	Cupid is a knavish lad
       	Thus to make poor females mad.
 
Enter Hermia.
 
HERMIA
Never so weary, never so in woe,
   Bedabbled with the dew and torn with briers,
I can no further crawl, no further go.
   My legs can keep no pace with my desires.
Here will I rest me till the break of day.
Heavens shield Lysander if they mean a fray!
She lies down and sleeps.
ROBIN
       	   On the ground
       	   Sleep sound.
       	   I’ll apply
       	   To your eye,
       	Gentle lover, remedy.
 
Robin applies the nectar
 to Lysander’s eyes.
       	   When thou wak’st,
       	   Thou tak’st
       	   True delight
       	   In the sight
       	Of thy former lady’s eye.
       	And the country proverb known,
       	That every man should take his own,
       	In your waking shall be shown.
       	   Jack shall have Jill;
       	   Naught shall go ill;
       	The man shall have his mare again, and all shall be
well.
He exits.
 
 
 

 
 
ACT 4
 
Scene 1
With the four lovers still asleep onstage, enter
Titania, Queen of Fairies, and Bottom and Fairies,
and Oberon, the King, behind them unseen by those
onstage.
 
TITANIA
Come, sit thee down upon this flow’ry bed,
   While I thy amiable cheeks do coy,
And stick muskroses in thy sleek smooth head,
   And kiss thy fair large ears, my gentle joy.
BOTTOM  Where’s Peaseblossom?
PEASEBLOSSOM  Ready.
BOTTOM  Scratch my head, Peaseblossom. Where’s
Monsieur Cobweb?
COBWEB  Ready.
BOTTOM  Monsieur Cobweb, good monsieur, get you
your weapons in your hand and kill me a red-hipped
humble-bee on the top of a thistle, and, good
monsieur, bring me the honey-bag. Do not fret
yourself too much in the action, monsieur, and,
good monsieur, have a care the honey-bag break
not; I would be loath to have you overflown with a
honey-bag, signior. Cobweb exits. Where’s Monsieur
Mustardseed?
MUSTARDSEED  Ready.
BOTTOM  Give me your neaf, Monsieur Mustardseed.
Pray you, leave your courtesy, good monsieur.
MUSTARDSEED  What’s your will?
BOTTOM  Nothing, good monsieur, but to help Cavalery
Cobweb to scratch. I must to the barber’s,
monsieur, for methinks I am marvels hairy about
the face. And I am such a tender ass, if my hair do
but tickle me, I must scratch.
TITANIA
What, wilt thou hear some music, my sweet love?
BOTTOM  I have a reasonable good ear in music. Let’s
have the tongs and the bones.
TITANIA
Or say, sweet love, what thou desirest to eat.
BOTTOM  Truly, a peck of provender. I could munch
your good dry oats. Methinks I have a great desire
to a bottle of hay. Good hay, sweet hay, hath no
fellow.
TITANIA
I have a venturous fairy that shall seek
The squirrel’s hoard and fetch thee new nuts.
BOTTOM  I had rather have a handful or two of dried
peas. But, I pray you, let none of your people stir
me; I have an exposition of sleep come upon me.
TITANIA
Sleep thou, and I will wind thee in my arms.—
Fairies, begone, and be all ways away.
Fairies exit.
So doth the woodbine the sweet honeysuckle
Gently entwist; the female ivy so
Enrings the barky fingers of the elm.
O, how I love thee! How I dote on thee!
Bottom and Titania sleep.
 
Enter Robin Goodfellow.
 
OBERON
Welcome, good Robin. Seest thou this sweet sight?
Her dotage now I do begin to pity.
For, meeting her of late behind the wood,
Seeking sweet favors for this hateful fool,
I did upbraid her and fall out with her.
For she his hairy temples then had rounded
With coronet of fresh and fragrant flowers;
And that same dew, which sometime on the buds
Was wont to swell like round and orient pearls,
Stood now within the pretty flouriets’ eyes,
Like tears that did their own disgrace bewail.
When I had at my pleasure taunted her,
And she in mild terms begged my patience,
I then did ask of her her changeling child,
Which straight she gave me, and her fairy sent
To bear him to my bower in Fairyland.
And now I have the boy, I will undo
This hateful imperfection of her eyes.
And, gentle Puck, take this transformèd scalp
From off the head of this Athenian swain,
That he, awaking when the other do,
May all to Athens back again repair
And think no more of this night’s accidents
But as the fierce vexation of a dream.
But first I will release the Fairy Queen.
He applies the nectar to her eyes.
       	Be as thou wast wont to be.
       	See as thou wast wont to see.
       	Dian’s bud o’er Cupid’s flower
       	Hath such force and blessèd power.
Now, my Titania, wake you, my sweet queen.
TITANIA, waking
My Oberon, what visions have I seen!
Methought I was enamored of an ass.
OBERON
There lies your love.
TITANIA  How came these things to pass?
O, how mine eyes do loathe his visage now!
OBERON
Silence awhile.—Robin, take off this head.—
Titania, music call; and strike more dead
Than common sleep of all these five the sense.
TITANIA
Music, ho, music such as charmeth sleep!
ROBIN, removing the ass-head from Bottom
Now, when thou wak’st, with thine own fool’s eyes
peep.
OBERON
Sound music.                                                                            	
Music.
Come, my queen, take hands with me,
And rock the ground whereon these sleepers be.
Titania and Oberon dance.
Now thou and I are new in amity,
And will tomorrow midnight solemnly
Dance in Duke Theseus’ house triumphantly,
And bless it to all fair prosperity.
There shall the pairs of faithful lovers be
Wedded, with Theseus, all in jollity.
ROBIN
       	Fairy king, attend and mark.
       	I do hear the morning lark.
OBERON
       	Then, my queen, in silence sad
       	Trip we after night’s shade.
       	We the globe can compass soon,
       	Swifter than the wand’ring moon.
TITANIA
       	Come, my lord, and in our flight
       	Tell me how it came this night
       	That I sleeping here was found
       	With these mortals on the ground.
Oberon, Robin, and Titania exit.
 
Wind horn. Enter Theseus and all his train,
Hippolyta, Egeus.
 
THESEUS
Go, one of you, find out the Forester.
For now our observation is performed,
And, since we have the vaward of the day,
My love shall hear the music of my hounds.
Uncouple in the western valley; let them go.
Dispatch, I say, and find the Forester.
A Servant exits.
We will, fair queen, up to the mountain’s top
And mark the musical confusion
Of hounds and echo in conjunction.
HIPPOLYTA
I was with Hercules and Cadmus once,
When in a wood of Crete they bayed the bear
With hounds of Sparta. Never did I hear
Such gallant chiding, for, besides the groves,
The skies, the fountains, every region near
Seemed all one mutual cry. I never heard
So musical a discord, such sweet thunder.
THESEUS
My hounds are bred out of the Spartan kind,
So flewed, so sanded; and their heads are hung
With ears that sweep away the morning dew;
Crook-kneed, and dewlapped like Thessalian bulls;
Slow in pursuit, but matched in mouth like bells,
Each under each. A cry more tunable
Was never holloed to, nor cheered with horn,
In Crete, in Sparta, nor in Thessaly.
Judge when you hear.—But soft! What nymphs are
these?
EGEUS
My lord, this is my daughter here asleep,
And this Lysander; this Demetrius is,
This Helena, old Nedar’s Helena.
I wonder of their being here together.
THESEUS
No doubt they rose up early to observe
The rite of May, and hearing our intent,
Came here in grace of our solemnity.
But speak, Egeus. Is not this the day
That Hermia should give answer of her choice?
EGEUS  It is, my lord.
THESEUS
Go, bid the huntsmen wake them with their horns.
A Servant exits.
Shout within. Wind horns. They all start up.
THESEUS
Good morrow, friends. Saint Valentine is past.
Begin these woodbirds but to couple now?
Demetrius, Helena, Hermia, and Lysander kneel.
LYSANDER
Pardon, my lord.
THESEUS  I pray you all, stand up.
They rise.
I know you two are rival enemies.
How comes this gentle concord in the world,
That hatred is so far from jealousy
To sleep by hate and fear no enmity?
LYSANDER
My lord, I shall reply amazèdly,
Half sleep, half waking. But as yet, I swear,
I cannot truly say how I came here.
But, as I think—for truly would I speak,
And now I do bethink me, so it is:
I came with Hermia hither. Our intent
Was to be gone from Athens, where we might,
Without the peril of the Athenian law—
EGEUS
Enough, enough!—My lord, you have enough.
I beg the law, the law upon his head.
They would have stol’n away.—They would,
Demetrius,
Thereby to have defeated you and me:
You of your wife and me of my consent,
Of my consent that she should be your wife.
DEMETRIUS
My lord, fair Helen told me of their stealth,
Of this their purpose hither to this wood,
And I in fury hither followed them,
Fair Helena in fancy following me.
But, my good lord, I wot not by what power
(But by some power it is) my love to Hermia,
Melted as the snow, seems to me now
As the remembrance of an idle gaud
Which in my childhood I did dote upon,
And all the faith, the virtue of my heart,
The object and the pleasure of mine eye,
Is only Helena. To her, my lord,
Was I betrothed ere I saw Hermia.
But like a sickness did I loathe this food.
But, as in health, come to my natural taste,
Now I do wish it, love it, long for it,
And will forevermore be true to it.
THESEUS
Fair lovers, you are fortunately met.
Of this discourse we more will hear anon.—
Egeus, I will overbear your will,
For in the temple by and by, with us,
These couples shall eternally be knit.—
And, for the morning now is something worn,
Our purposed hunting shall be set aside.
Away with us to Athens. Three and three,
We’ll hold a feast in great solemnity.
Come, Hippolyta.
Theseus and his train,
including Hippolyta and Egeus, exit.
DEMETRIUS
These things seem small and undistinguishable,
Like far-off mountains turnèd into clouds.
HERMIA
Methinks I see these things with parted eye,
When everything seems double.
HELENA  So methinks.
And I have found Demetrius like a jewel,
Mine own and not mine own.
DEMETRIUS  Are you sure
That we are awake? It seems to me
That yet we sleep, we dream. Do not you think
The Duke was here and bid us follow him?
HERMIA
Yea, and my father.
HELENA  And Hippolyta.
LYSANDER
And he did bid us follow to the temple.
DEMETRIUS
Why, then, we are awake. Let’s follow him,
And by the way let us recount our dreams.
Lovers exit.
BOTTOM, waking up   When my cue comes, call me,
and I will answer. My next is “Most fair Pyramus.”
Hey-ho! Peter Quince! Flute the bellows-mender!
Snout the tinker! Starveling! God’s my life! Stolen
hence and left me asleep! I have had a most rare
vision. I have had a dream past the wit of man to say
what dream it was. Man is but an ass if he go about
to expound this dream. Methought I was—there
is no man can tell what. Methought I was and
methought I had—but man is but a patched fool if
he will offer to say what methought I had. The eye of
man hath not heard, the ear of man hath not seen,
man’s hand is not able to taste, his tongue to
conceive, nor his heart to report what my dream
was. I will get Peter Quince to write a ballad of this
dream. It shall be called “Bottom’s Dream” because
it hath no bottom; and I will sing it in the
latter end of a play, before the Duke. Peradventure,
to make it the more gracious, I shall sing it at her
death.
He exits.
 
Scene 2
Enter Quince, Flute, Snout, and Starveling.
 
QUINCE  Have you sent to Bottom’s house? Is he come
home yet?
STARVELING  He cannot be heard of. Out of doubt he
is transported.
FLUTE  If he come not, then the play is marred. It goes
not forward, doth it?
QUINCE  It is not possible. You have not a man in all
Athens able to discharge Pyramus but he.
FLUTE  No, he hath simply the best wit of any handicraftman
in Athens.
QUINCE  Yea, and the best person too, and he is a very
paramour for a sweet voice.
FLUTE  You must say “paragon.” A “paramour” is (God
bless us) a thing of naught.
 
Enter Snug the joiner.
 
SNUG  Masters, the Duke is coming from the temple,
and there is two or three lords and ladies more
married. If our sport had gone forward, we had all
been made men.
FLUTE  O, sweet bully Bottom! Thus hath he lost sixpence
a day during his life. He could not have
’scaped sixpence a day. An the Duke had not given
him sixpence a day for playing Pyramus, I’ll be
hanged. He would have deserved it. Sixpence a day
in Pyramus, or nothing!
 
Enter Bottom.
 
BOTTOM  Where are these lads? Where are these
hearts?
QUINCE  Bottom! O most courageous day! O most happy
hour!
BOTTOM  Masters, I am to discourse wonders. But ask
me not what; for, if I tell you, I am not true
Athenian. I will tell you everything right as it fell
out.
QUINCE  Let us hear, sweet Bottom.
BOTTOM  Not a word of me. All that I will tell you is that
the Duke hath dined. Get your apparel together,
good strings to your beards, new ribbons to your
pumps. Meet presently at the palace. Every man
look o’er his part. For the short and the long is, our
play is preferred. In any case, let Thisbe have clean
linen, and let not him that plays the lion pare his
nails, for they shall hang out for the lion’s claws.
And, most dear actors, eat no onions nor garlic, for
we are to utter sweet breath, and I do not doubt but
to hear them say it is a sweet comedy. No more
words. Away! Go, away!
They exit.
 
 
 

 
 
ACT 5
 
Scene 1
Enter Theseus, Hippolyta, and Philostrate, Lords, and
Attendants.
 
HIPPOLYTA
’Tis strange, my Theseus, that these lovers speak of.
THESEUS
More strange than true. I never may believe
These antique fables nor these fairy toys.
Lovers and madmen have such seething brains,
Such shaping fantasies, that apprehend
More than cool reason ever comprehends.
The lunatic, the lover, and the poet
Are of imagination all compact.
One sees more devils than vast hell can hold:
That is the madman. The lover, all as frantic,
Sees Helen’s beauty in a brow of Egypt.
The poet’s eye, in a fine frenzy rolling,
Doth glance from heaven to Earth, from Earth to
heaven,
And as imagination bodies forth
The forms of things unknown, the poet’s pen
Turns them to shapes and gives to airy nothing
A local habitation and a name.
Such tricks hath strong imagination
That, if it would but apprehend some joy,
It comprehends some bringer of that joy.
Or in the night, imagining some fear,
How easy is a bush supposed a bear!
HIPPOLYTA
But all the story of the night told over,
And all their minds transfigured so together,
More witnesseth than fancy’s images
And grows to something of great constancy,
But, howsoever, strange and admirable.
 
Enter Lovers: Lysander, Demetrius, Hermia, and Helena.
 
THESEUS
Here come the lovers full of joy and mirth.—
Joy, gentle friends! Joy and fresh days of love
Accompany your hearts!
LYSANDER  More than to us
Wait in your royal walks, your board, your bed!
THESEUS
Come now, what masques, what dances shall we
have
To wear away this long age of three hours
Between our after-supper and bedtime?
Where is our usual manager of mirth?
What revels are in hand? Is there no play
To ease the anguish of a torturing hour?
Call Philostrate.
PHILOSTRATE, coming forward  Here, mighty Theseus.
THESEUS
Say what abridgment have you for this evening,
What masque, what music? How shall we beguile
The lazy time if not with some delight?
PHILOSTRATE, giving Theseus a paper
There is a brief how many sports are ripe.
Make choice of which your Highness will see first.
THESEUS
“The battle with the Centaurs, to be sung
By an Athenian eunuch to the harp.”
We’ll none of that. That have I told my love
In glory of my kinsman Hercules.
“The riot of the tipsy Bacchanals,
Tearing the Thracian singer in their rage.”
That is an old device, and it was played
When I from Thebes came last a conqueror.
“The thrice-three Muses mourning for the death
Of learning, late deceased in beggary.”
That is some satire, keen and critical,
Not sorting with a nuptial ceremony.
“A tedious brief scene of young Pyramus
And his love Thisbe, very tragical mirth.”
“Merry” and “tragical”? “Tedious” and “brief”?
That is hot ice and wondrous strange snow!
How shall we find the concord of this discord?
PHILOSTRATE
A play there is, my lord, some ten words long
(Which is as brief as I have known a play),
But by ten words, my lord, it is too long,
Which makes it tedious; for in all the play,
There is not one word apt, one player fitted.
And tragical, my noble lord, it is.
For Pyramus therein doth kill himself,
Which, when I saw rehearsed, I must confess,
Made mine eyes water; but more merry tears
The passion of loud laughter never shed.
THESEUS
What are they that do play it?
PHILOSTRATE
Hard-handed men that work in Athens here,
Which never labored in their minds till now,
And now have toiled their unbreathed memories
With this same play, against your nuptial.
THESEUS
And we will hear it.
PHILOSTRATE  No, my noble lord,
It is not for you. I have heard it over,
And it is nothing, nothing in the world,
Unless you can find sport in their intents,
Extremely stretched and conned with cruel pain
To do you service.
THESEUS  I will hear that play,
For never anything can be amiss
When simpleness and duty tender it.
Go, bring them in—and take your places, ladies.
Philostrate exits.
HIPPOLYTA
I love not to see wretchedness o’ercharged,
And duty in his service perishing.
THESEUS
Why, gentle sweet, you shall see no such thing.
HIPPOLYTA
He says they can do nothing in this kind.
THESEUS
The kinder we, to give them thanks for nothing.
Our sport shall be to take what they mistake;
And what poor duty cannot do, noble respect
Takes it in might, not merit.
Where I have come, great clerks have purposèd
To greet me with premeditated welcomes,
Where I have seen them shiver and look pale,
Make periods in the midst of sentences,
Throttle their practiced accent in their fears,
And in conclusion dumbly have broke off,
Not paying me a welcome. Trust me, sweet,
Out of this silence yet I picked a welcome,
And in the modesty of fearful duty,
I read as much as from the rattling tongue
Of saucy and audacious eloquence.
Love, therefore, and tongue-tied simplicity
In least speak most, to my capacity.
 
Enter Philostrate.
 
PHILOSTRATE
So please your Grace, the Prologue is addressed.
THESEUS  Let him approach.
 
Enter the Prologue.
 
PROLOGUE
If we offend, it is with our goodwill.
   That you should think we come not to offend,
But with goodwill. To show our simple skill,
   That is the true beginning of our end.
Consider, then, we come but in despite.
   We do not come, as minding to content you,
Our true intent is. All for your delight
   We are not here. That you should here repent
   you,
The actors are at hand, and, by their show,
You shall know all that you are like to know.
Prologue exits.
THESEUS  This fellow doth not stand upon points.
LYSANDER  He hath rid his prologue like a rough colt;
he knows not the stop. A good moral, my lord: it is
not enough to speak, but to speak true.
HIPPOLYTA  Indeed he hath played on this prologue like
a child on a recorder—a sound, but not in
government.
THESEUS  His speech was like a tangled chain—nothing
impaired, but all disordered. Who is next?
 
Enter Pyramus (Bottom), and Thisbe (Flute), and
Wall (Snout), and Moonshine (Starveling), and Lion
(Snug), and Prologue (Quince).
 
QUINCE, as Prologue
Gentles, perchance you wonder at this show.
   But wonder on, till truth make all things plain.
This man is Pyramus, if you would know.
   This beauteous lady Thisbe is certain.
This man with lime and roughcast doth present
   “Wall,” that vile wall which did these lovers
   sunder;
And through Wall’s chink, poor souls, they are
content
   To whisper, at the which let no man wonder.
This man, with lantern, dog, and bush of thorn,
   Presenteth “Moonshine,” for, if you will know,
By moonshine did these lovers think no scorn
   To meet at Ninus’ tomb, there, there to woo.
This grisly beast (which “Lion” hight by name)
   The trusty Thisbe coming first by night
Did scare away or rather did affright;
And, as she fled, her mantle she did fall,
   Which Lion vile with bloody mouth did stain.
Anon comes Pyramus, sweet youth and tall,
   And finds his trusty Thisbe’s mantle slain.
Whereat, with blade, with bloody blameful blade,
   He bravely broached his boiling bloody breast.
And Thisbe, tarrying in mulberry shade,
   His dagger drew, and died. For all the rest,
Let Lion, Moonshine, Wall, and lovers twain
At large discourse, while here they do remain.
THESEUS  I wonder if the lion be to speak.
DEMETRIUS  No wonder, my lord. One lion may when
many asses do.
Lion, Thisbe, Moonshine, and Prologue exit.
SNOUT, as Wall
In this same interlude it doth befall
That I, one Snout by name, present a wall;
And such a wall as I would have you think
That had in it a crannied hole or chink,
Through which the lovers, Pyramus and Thisbe,
Did whisper often, very secretly.
This loam, this roughcast, and this stone doth show
That I am that same wall. The truth is so.
And this the cranny is, right and sinister,
Through which the fearful lovers are to whisper.
THESEUS  Would you desire lime and hair to speak
better?
DEMETRIUS  It is the wittiest partition that ever I heard
discourse, my lord.
THESEUS  Pyramus draws near the wall. Silence.
BOTTOM, as Pyramus
O grim-looked night! O night with hue so black!
   O night, which ever art when day is not!
O night! O night! Alack, alack, alack!
   I fear my Thisbe’s promise is forgot.
And thou, O wall, O sweet, O lovely wall,
   That stand’st between her father’s ground and
   mine,
Thou wall, O wall, O sweet and lovely wall,
   Show me thy chink to blink through with mine
   eyne.
Thanks, courteous wall. Jove shield thee well for
this.
   But what see I? No Thisbe do I see.
O wicked wall, through whom I see no bliss,
   Cursed be thy stones for thus deceiving me!
THESEUS  The wall, methinks, being sensible, should
curse again.
BOTTOM  No, in truth, sir, he should not. “Deceiving
me” is Thisbe’s cue. She is to enter now, and I am
to spy her through the wall. You shall see it will fall
pat as I told you. Yonder she comes.
 
Enter Thisbe (Flute).
 
FLUTE, as Thisbe
O wall, full often hast thou heard my moans
   For parting my fair Pyramus and me.
My cherry lips have often kissed thy stones,
   Thy stones with lime and hair knit up in thee.
BOTTOM, as Pyramus
I see a voice! Now will I to the chink
   To spy an I can hear my Thisbe’s face.
Thisbe?
FLUTE, as Thisbe
My love! Thou art my love, I think.
BOTTOM, as Pyramus
   Think what thou wilt, I am thy lover’s grace,
And, like Limander, am I trusty still.
FLUTE, as Thisbe
And I like Helen, till the Fates me kill.
BOTTOM, as Pyramus
Not Shafalus to Procrus was so true.
FLUTE, as Thisbe
As Shafalus to Procrus, I to you.
BOTTOM, as Pyramus
O kiss me through the hole of this vile wall.
FLUTE, as Thisbe
I kiss the wall’s hole, not your lips at all.
BOTTOM, as Pyramus
Wilt thou at Ninny’s tomb meet me straightway?
FLUTE, as Thisbe
’Tide life, ’tide death, I come without delay.
Bottom and Flute exit.
SNOUT, as Wall
Thus have I, Wall, my part dischargèd so,
And, being done, thus Wall away doth go.                         	
He exits.
THESEUS  Now is the wall down between the two
neighbors.
DEMETRIUS  No remedy, my lord, when walls are so
willful to hear without warning.
HIPPOLYTA  This is the silliest stuff that ever I heard.
THESEUS  The best in this kind are but shadows, and
the worst are no worse, if imagination amend
them.
HIPPOLYTA  It must be your imagination, then, and not
theirs.
THESEUS  If we imagine no worse of them than they of
themselves, they may pass for excellent men. Here
come two noble beasts in, a man and a lion.
 
Enter Lion (Snug) and Moonshine (Starveling).
 
SNUG, as Lion
You ladies, you whose gentle hearts do fear
   The smallest monstrous mouse that creeps on
   floor,
May now perchance both quake and tremble here,
   When lion rough in wildest rage doth roar.
Then know that I, as Snug the joiner, am
A lion fell, nor else no lion’s dam;
For if I should as lion come in strife
Into this place, ’twere pity on my life.
THESEUS  A very gentle beast, and of a good
conscience.
DEMETRIUS  The very best at a beast, my lord, that e’er I
saw.
LYSANDER  This lion is a very fox for his valor.
THESEUS  True, and a goose for his discretion.
DEMETRIUS  Not so, my lord, for his valor cannot carry
his discretion, and the fox carries the goose.
THESEUS  His discretion, I am sure, cannot carry his
valor, for the goose carries not the fox. It is well.
Leave it to his discretion, and let us listen to the
Moon.
STARVELING, as Moonshine
This lanthorn doth the hornèd moon present.
DEMETRIUS  He should have worn the horns on his
head.
THESEUS  He is no crescent, and his horns are invisible
within the circumference.
STARVELING, as Moonshine
This lanthorn doth the hornèd moon present.
Myself the man i’ th’ moon do seem to be.
THESEUS  This is the greatest error of all the rest; the
man should be put into the lanthorn. How is it else
“the man i’ th’ moon”?
DEMETRIUS  He dares not come there for the candle,
for you see, it is already in snuff.
HIPPOLYTA  I am aweary of this moon. Would he would
change.
THESEUS  It appears by his small light of discretion that
he is in the wane; but yet, in courtesy, in all reason,
we must stay the time.
LYSANDER  Proceed, Moon.
STARVELING, as Moonshine   All that I have to say is to tell
you that the lanthorn is the moon, I the man i’ th’
moon, this thornbush my thornbush, and this dog
my dog.
DEMETRIUS  Why, all these should be in the lanthorn,
for all these are in the moon. But silence. Here
comes Thisbe.
 
Enter Thisbe (Flute).
 
FLUTE, as Thisbe
This is old Ninny’s tomb. Where is my love?
SNUG, as Lion  O!
The Lion roars. Thisbe runs off,
dropping her mantle.
DEMETRIUS  Well roared, Lion.
THESEUS  Well run, Thisbe.
HIPPOLYTA  Well shone, Moon. Truly, the Moon shines
with a good grace.
Lion worries the mantle.
THESEUS  Well moused, Lion.
 
Enter Pyramus (Bottom).
 
DEMETRIUS  And then came Pyramus.
Lion exits.
LYSANDER  And so the lion vanished.
BOTTOM, as Pyramus
Sweet Moon, I thank thee for thy sunny beams.
   I thank thee, Moon, for shining now so bright,
For by thy gracious, golden, glittering gleams,
   I trust to take of truest Thisbe sight.—
  	But stay! O spite!
  	But mark, poor knight,
   What dreadful dole is here!
 	 Eyes, do you see!
  	How can it be!
   O dainty duck! O dear!
  	Thy mantle good—
  	What, stained with blood?
   Approach, ye Furies fell!
  	O Fates, come, come,
  	Cut thread and thrum,
   Quail, crush, conclude, and quell!
THESEUS  This passion, and the death of a dear friend,
would go near to make a man look sad.
HIPPOLYTA  Beshrew my heart but I pity the man.
BOTTOM, as Pyramus
O, wherefore, Nature, didst thou lions frame,
   Since lion vile hath here deflowered my dear,
Which is—no, no—which was the fairest dame
   That lived, that loved, that liked, that looked with
   cheer?
  	Come, tears, confound!
  	Out, sword, and wound
   The pap of Pyramus;
  	Ay, that left pap,
  	Where heart doth hop.                            	
Pyramus stabs himself.
   Thus die I, thus, thus, thus.
  	Now am I dead;
  	Now am I fled;
   My soul is in the sky.
  	Tongue, lose thy light!
  	Moon, take thy flight!                                      	
Moonshine exits.
   Now die, die, die, die, die.                                       	
Pyramus falls.
DEMETRIUS  No die, but an ace for him, for he is but
one.
LYSANDER  Less than an ace, man, for he is dead, he is
nothing.
THESEUS  With the help of a surgeon he might yet
recover and yet prove an ass.
HIPPOLYTA  How chance Moonshine is gone before
Thisbe comes back and finds her lover?
THESEUS  She will find him by starlight.
 
Enter Thisbe (Flute).
 
Here she comes, and her passion ends the play.
HIPPOLYTA  Methinks she should not use a long one for
such a Pyramus. I hope she will be brief.
DEMETRIUS  A mote will turn the balance, which Pyramus,
which Thisbe, is the better: he for a man, God
warrant us; she for a woman, God bless us.
LYSANDER  She hath spied him already with those
sweet eyes.
DEMETRIUS  And thus she means, videlicet—
FLUTE, as Thisbe
       	      Asleep, my love?
       	      What, dead, my dove?
       	   O Pyramus, arise!
       	      Speak, speak. Quite dumb?
       	      Dead? Dead? A tomb
       	   Must cover thy sweet eyes.
       	      These lily lips,
       	      This cherry nose,
       	   These yellow cowslip cheeks
       	      Are gone, are gone!
       	      Lovers, make moan;
       	   His eyes were green as leeks.
       	      O Sisters Three,
       	      Come, come to me
       	   With hands as pale as milk.
       	      Lay them in gore,
       	      Since you have shore
       	   With shears his thread of silk.
       	      Tongue, not a word!
       	      Come, trusty sword,
       	   Come, blade, my breast imbrue!
Thisbe stabs herself.
       	      And farewell, friends.
       	      Thus Thisbe ends.
                                                                         	   
Adieu, adieu, adieu. Thisbe falls.
THESEUS  Moonshine and Lion are left to bury the
dead.
DEMETRIUS  Ay, and Wall too.
Bottom and Flute arise.
BOTTOM  No, I assure you, the wall is down that
parted their fathers. Will it please you to see the
Epilogue or to hear a Bergomask dance between
two of our company?
THESEUS  No epilogue, I pray you. For your play needs
no excuse. Never excuse. For when the players are
all dead, there need none to be blamed. Marry, if
he that writ it had played Pyramus and hanged
himself in Thisbe’s garter, it would have been a fine
tragedy; and so it is, truly, and very notably discharged.
But, come, your Bergomask. Let your
epilogue alone.
Dance, and the players exit.
The iron tongue of midnight hath told twelve.
Lovers, to bed! ’Tis almost fairy time.
I fear we shall outsleep the coming morn
As much as we this night have overwatched.
This palpable-gross play hath well beguiled
The heavy gait of night. Sweet friends, to bed.
A fortnight hold we this solemnity
In nightly revels and new jollity.                                       	
They exit.
 
Enter Robin Goodfellow.
 
ROBIN
       	Now the hungry lion roars,
       	   And the wolf behowls the moon,
       	Whilst the heavy plowman snores,
       	   All with weary task fordone.
       	Now the wasted brands do glow,
       	   Whilst the screech-owl, screeching loud,
       	Puts the wretch that lies in woe
       	   In remembrance of a shroud.
       	Now it is the time of night
       	   That the graves, all gaping wide,
       	Every one lets forth his sprite
       	   In the church-way paths to glide.
       	And we fairies, that do run
       	   By the triple Hecate’s team
       	From the presence of the sun,
       	   Following darkness like a dream,
       	Now are frolic. Not a mouse
       	Shall disturb this hallowed house.
       	I am sent with broom before,
       	To sweep the dust behind the door.
 
Enter Oberon and Titania, King and Queen of Fairies,
with all their train.
 
OBERON
       	Through the house give glimmering light,
       	   By the dead and drowsy fire.
       	Every elf and fairy sprite,
       	   Hop as light as bird from brier,
       	And this ditty after me,
       	Sing and dance it trippingly.
TITANIA
       	First rehearse your song by rote,
       	To each word a warbling note.
       	Hand in hand, with fairy grace,
       	Will we sing and bless this place.
Oberon leads the Fairies in song and dance.
OBERON
       	Now, until the break of day,
       	Through this house each fairy stray.
       	To the best bride-bed will we,
       	Which by us shall blessèd be,
       	And the issue there create
       	Ever shall be fortunate.
       	So shall all the couples three
       	Ever true in loving be,
       	And the blots of Nature’s hand
       	Shall not in their issue stand.
       	Never mole, harelip, nor scar,
       	Nor mark prodigious, such as are
       	Despisèd in nativity,
       	Shall upon their children be.
       	With this field-dew consecrate
       	Every fairy take his gait,
       	And each several chamber bless,
       	Through this palace, with sweet peace.
       	And the owner of it blest,
       	Ever shall in safety rest.
       	Trip away. Make no stay.
       	Meet me all by break of day.
All but Robin exit.
ROBIN
       	If we shadows have offended,
       	Think but this and all is mended:
       	That you have but slumbered here
       	While these visions did appear.
       	And this weak and idle theme,
       	No more yielding but a dream,
       	Gentles, do not reprehend.
       	If you pardon, we will mend.
       	And, as I am an honest Puck,
       	If we have unearnèd luck
       	Now to ’scape the serpent’s tongue,
       	We will make amends ere long.
       	Else the Puck a liar call.
       	So good night unto you all.
       	Give me your hands, if we be friends,
       	And Robin shall restore amends.
He exits.
 

Hamlet
 
 
ACT 1
 
Scene 1
Enter Barnardo and Francisco, two sentinels.
 
BARNARDO  Who’s there?
FRANCISCO
Nay, answer me. Stand and unfold yourself.
BARNARDO  Long live the King!
FRANCISCO  Barnardo?
BARNARDO  He.
FRANCISCO
You come most carefully upon your hour.
BARNARDO
’Tis now struck twelve. Get thee to bed, Francisco.
FRANCISCO
For this relief much thanks. ’Tis bitter cold,
And I am sick at heart.
BARNARDO  Have you had quiet guard?
FRANCISCO  Not a mouse stirring.
BARNARDO  Well, good night.
If you do meet Horatio and Marcellus,
The rivals of my watch, bid them make haste.
 
Enter Horatio and Marcellus.
 
FRANCISCO
I think I hear them.—Stand ho! Who is there?
HORATIO  Friends to this ground.
MARCELLUS  And liegemen to the Dane.
FRANCISCO  Give you good night.
MARCELLUS
O farewell, honest soldier. Who hath relieved
you?
FRANCISCO
Barnardo hath my place. Give you good night.
Francisco exits.
MARCELLUS  Holla, Barnardo.
BARNARDO  Say, what, is Horatio there?
HORATIO  A piece of him.
BARNARDO
Welcome, Horatio.—Welcome, good Marcellus.
HORATIO
What, has this thing appeared again tonight?
BARNARDO  I have seen nothing.
MARCELLUS
Horatio says ’tis but our fantasy
And will not let belief take hold of him
Touching this dreaded sight twice seen of us.
Therefore I have entreated him along
With us to watch the minutes of this night,
That, if again this apparition come,
He may approve our eyes and speak to it.
HORATIO
Tush, tush, ’twill not appear.
BARNARDO  Sit down awhile,
And let us once again assail your ears,
That are so fortified against our story,
What we have two nights seen.
HORATIO  Well, sit we down,
And let us hear Barnardo speak of this.
BARNARDO  Last night of all,
When yond same star that’s westward from the pole
Had made his course t’ illume that part of heaven
Where now it burns, Marcellus and myself,
The bell then beating one—
 
Enter Ghost.
 
MARCELLUS
Peace, break thee off! Look where it comes again.
BARNARDO
In the same figure like the King that’s dead.
MARCELLUS, to Horatio
Thou art a scholar. Speak to it, Horatio.
BARNARDO
Looks he not like the King? Mark it, Horatio.
HORATIO
Most like. It harrows me with fear and wonder.
BARNARDO
It would be spoke to.
MARCELLUS  Speak to it, Horatio.
HORATIO
What art thou that usurp’st this time of night,
Together with that fair and warlike form
In which the majesty of buried Denmark
Did sometimes march? By heaven, I charge thee,
speak.
MARCELLUS
It is offended.
BARNARDO  See, it stalks away.
HORATIO
Stay! speak! speak! I charge thee, speak!
Ghost exits.
MARCELLUS  ’Tis gone and will not answer.
BARNARDO
How now, Horatio, you tremble and look pale.
Is not this something more than fantasy?
What think you on ’t?
HORATIO
Before my God, I might not this believe
Without the sensible and true avouch
Of mine own eyes.
MARCELLUS  Is it not like the King?
HORATIO  As thou art to thyself.
Such was the very armor he had on
When he the ambitious Norway combated.
So frowned he once when, in an angry parle,
He smote the sledded Polacks on the ice.
’Tis strange.
MARCELLUS
Thus twice before, and jump at this dead hour,
With martial stalk hath he gone by our watch.
HORATIO
In what particular thought to work I know not,
But in the gross and scope of mine opinion
This bodes some strange eruption to our state.
MARCELLUS
Good now, sit down, and tell me, he that knows,
Why this same strict and most observant watch
So nightly toils the subject of the land,
And why such daily cast of brazen cannon
And foreign mart for implements of war,
Why such impress of shipwrights, whose sore task
Does not divide the Sunday from the week.
What might be toward that this sweaty haste
Doth make the night joint laborer with the day?
Who is ’t that can inform me?
HORATIO  That can I.
At least the whisper goes so: our last king,
Whose image even but now appeared to us,
Was, as you know, by Fortinbras of Norway,
Thereto pricked on by a most emulate pride,
Dared to the combat; in which our valiant Hamlet
(For so this side of our known world esteemed him)
Did slay this Fortinbras, who by a sealed compact,
Well ratified by law and heraldry,
Did forfeit, with his life, all those his lands
Which he stood seized of, to the conqueror.
Against the which a moiety competent
Was gagèd by our king, which had returned
To the inheritance of Fortinbras
Had he been vanquisher, as, by the same comart
And carriage of the article designed,
His fell to Hamlet. Now, sir, young Fortinbras,
Of unimprovèd mettle hot and full,
Hath in the skirts of Norway here and there
Sharked up a list of lawless resolutes
For food and diet to some enterprise
That hath a stomach in ’t; which is no other
(As it doth well appear unto our state)
But to recover of us, by strong hand
And terms compulsatory, those foresaid lands
So by his father lost. And this, I take it,
Is the main motive of our preparations,
The source of this our watch, and the chief head
Of this posthaste and rummage in the land.
BARNARDO
I think it be no other but e’en so.
Well may it sort that this portentous figure
Comes armèd through our watch so like the king
That was and is the question of these wars.
HORATIO
A mote it is to trouble the mind’s eye.
In the most high and palmy state of Rome,
A little ere the mightiest Julius fell,
The graves stood tenantless, and the sheeted dead
Did squeak and gibber in the Roman streets;
As stars with trains of fire and dews of blood,
Disasters in the sun; and the moist star,
Upon whose influence Neptune’s empire stands,
Was sick almost to doomsday with eclipse.
And even the like precurse of feared events,
As harbingers preceding still the fates
And prologue to the omen coming on,
Have heaven and Earth together demonstrated
Unto our climatures and countrymen.
 
Enter Ghost.
 
But soft, behold! Lo, where it comes again!
I’ll cross it though it blast me.—Stay, illusion!
It spreads his arms.
If thou hast any sound or use of voice,
Speak to me.
If there be any good thing to be done
That may to thee do ease and grace to me,
Speak to me.
If thou art privy to thy country’s fate,
Which happily foreknowing may avoid,
O, speak!
Or if thou hast uphoarded in thy life
Extorted treasure in the womb of earth,
For which, they say, you spirits oft walk in death,
Speak of it.                                                                	
The cock crows.
Stay and speak!—Stop it, Marcellus.
MARCELLUS
Shall I strike it with my partisan?
HORATIO  Do, if it will not stand.
BARNARDO  ’Tis here.
HORATIO  ’Tis here.
Ghost exits.
MARCELLUS  ’Tis gone.
We do it wrong, being so majestical,
To offer it the show of violence,
For it is as the air, invulnerable,
And our vain blows malicious mockery.
BARNARDO
It was about to speak when the cock crew.
HORATIO
And then it started like a guilty thing
Upon a fearful summons. I have heard
The cock, that is the trumpet to the morn,
Doth with his lofty and shrill-sounding throat
Awake the god of day, and at his warning,
Whether in sea or fire, in earth or air,
Th’ extravagant and erring spirit hies
To his confine, and of the truth herein
This present object made probation.
MARCELLUS
It faded on the crowing of the cock.
Some say that ever ’gainst that season comes
Wherein our Savior’s birth is celebrated,
This bird of dawning singeth all night long;
And then, they say, no spirit dare stir abroad,
The nights are wholesome; then no planets strike,
No fairy takes, nor witch hath power to charm,
So hallowed and so gracious is that time.
HORATIO
So have I heard and do in part believe it.
But look, the morn in russet mantle clad
Walks o’er the dew of yon high eastward hill.
Break we our watch up, and by my advice
Let us impart what we have seen tonight
Unto young Hamlet; for, upon my life,
This spirit, dumb to us, will speak to him.
Do you consent we shall acquaint him with it
As needful in our loves, fitting our duty?
MARCELLUS
Let’s do ’t, I pray, and I this morning know
Where we shall find him most convenient.
They exit.
 
Scene 2
Flourish. Enter Claudius, King of Denmark, Gertrude the
Queen, the Council, as Polonius, and his son Laertes,
Hamlet, with others, among them Voltemand and
Cornelius.
 
KING
Though yet of Hamlet our dear brother’s death
The memory be green, and that it us befitted
To bear our hearts in grief, and our whole kingdom
To be contracted in one brow of woe,
Yet so far hath discretion fought with nature
That we with wisest sorrow think on him
Together with remembrance of ourselves.
Therefore our sometime sister, now our queen,
Th’ imperial jointress to this warlike state,
Have we (as ’twere with a defeated joy,
With an auspicious and a dropping eye,
With mirth in funeral and with dirge in marriage,
In equal scale weighing delight and dole)
Taken to wife. Nor have we herein barred
Your better wisdoms, which have freely gone
With this affair along. For all, our thanks.
Now follows that you know. Young Fortinbras,
Holding a weak supposal of our worth
Or thinking by our late dear brother’s death
Our state to be disjoint and out of frame,
Colleaguèd with this dream of his advantage,
He hath not failed to pester us with message
Importing the surrender of those lands
Lost by his father, with all bonds of law,
To our most valiant brother—so much for him.
Now for ourself and for this time of meeting.
Thus much the business is: we have here writ
To Norway, uncle of young Fortinbras,
Who, impotent and bedrid, scarcely hears
Of this his nephew’s purpose, to suppress
His further gait herein, in that the levies,
The lists, and full proportions are all made
Out of his subject; and we here dispatch
You, good Cornelius, and you, Voltemand,
For bearers of this greeting to old Norway,
Giving to you no further personal power
To business with the King more than the scope
Of these dilated articles allow.
Giving them a paper.
Farewell, and let your haste commend your duty.
CORNELIUS/VOLTEMAND
In that and all things will we show our duty.
KING
We doubt it nothing. Heartily farewell.
Voltemand and Cornelius exit.
And now, Laertes, what’s the news with you?
You told us of some suit. What is ’t, Laertes?
You cannot speak of reason to the Dane
And lose your voice. What wouldst thou beg,
Laertes,
That shall not be my offer, not thy asking?
The head is not more native to the heart,
The hand more instrumental to the mouth,
Than is the throne of Denmark to thy father.
What wouldst thou have, Laertes?
LAERTES  My dread lord,
Your leave and favor to return to France,
From whence though willingly I came to Denmark
To show my duty in your coronation,
Yet now I must confess, that duty done,
My thoughts and wishes bend again toward France
And bow them to your gracious leave and pardon.
KING
Have you your father’s leave? What says Polonius?
POLONIUS
Hath, my lord, wrung from me my slow leave
By laborsome petition, and at last
Upon his will I sealed my hard consent.
I do beseech you give him leave to go.
KING
Take thy fair hour, Laertes. Time be thine,
And thy best graces spend it at thy will.—
But now, my cousin Hamlet and my son—
HAMLET, aside
A little more than kin and less than kind.
KING
How is it that the clouds still hang on you?
HAMLET
Not so, my lord; I am too much in the sun.
QUEEN
Good Hamlet, cast thy nighted color off,
And let thine eye look like a friend on Denmark.
Do not forever with thy vailèd lids
Seek for thy noble father in the dust.
Thou know’st ’tis common; all that lives must die,
Passing through nature to eternity.
HAMLET
Ay, madam, it is common.
QUEEN  If it be,
Why seems it so particular with thee?
HAMLET
“Seems,” madam? Nay, it is. I know not “seems.”
’Tis not alone my inky cloak, good mother,
Nor customary suits of solemn black,
Nor windy suspiration of forced breath,
No, nor the fruitful river in the eye,
Nor the dejected havior of the visage,
Together with all forms, moods, shapes of grief,
That can denote me truly. These indeed “seem,”
For they are actions that a man might play;
But I have that within which passes show,
These but the trappings and the suits of woe.
KING
’Tis sweet and commendable in your nature,
Hamlet,
To give these mourning duties to your father.
But you must know your father lost a father,
That father lost, lost his, and the survivor bound
In filial obligation for some term
To do obsequious sorrow. But to persever
In obstinate condolement is a course
Of impious stubbornness. ’Tis unmanly grief.
It shows a will most incorrect to heaven,
A heart unfortified, a mind impatient,
An understanding simple and unschooled.
For what we know must be and is as common
As any the most vulgar thing to sense,
Why should we in our peevish opposition
Take it to heart? Fie, ’tis a fault to heaven,
A fault against the dead, a fault to nature,
To reason most absurd, whose common theme
Is death of fathers, and who still hath cried,
From the first corse till he that died today,
“This must be so.” We pray you, throw to earth
This unprevailing woe and think of us
As of a father; for let the world take note,
You are the most immediate to our throne,
And with no less nobility of love
Than that which dearest father bears his son
Do I impart toward you. For your intent
In going back to school in Wittenberg,
It is most retrograde to our desire,
And we beseech you, bend you to remain
Here in the cheer and comfort of our eye,
Our chiefest courtier, cousin, and our son.
QUEEN
Let not thy mother lose her prayers, Hamlet.
I pray thee, stay with us. Go not to Wittenberg.
HAMLET
I shall in all my best obey you, madam.
KING
Why, ’tis a loving and a fair reply.
Be as ourself in Denmark.—Madam, come.
This gentle and unforced accord of Hamlet
Sits smiling to my heart, in grace whereof
No jocund health that Denmark drinks today
But the great cannon to the clouds shall tell,
And the King’s rouse the heaven shall bruit again,
Respeaking earthly thunder. Come away.
Flourish. All but Hamlet exit.
HAMLET
O, that this too, too sullied flesh would melt,
Thaw, and resolve itself into a dew,
Or that the Everlasting had not fixed
His canon ’gainst self-slaughter! O God, God,
How weary, stale, flat, and unprofitable
Seem to me all the uses of this world!
Fie on ’t, ah fie! ’Tis an unweeded garden
That grows to seed. Things rank and gross in nature
Possess it merely. That it should come to this:
But two months dead—nay, not so much, not two.
So excellent a king, that was to this
Hyperion to a satyr; so loving to my mother
That he might not beteem the winds of heaven
Visit her face too roughly. Heaven and Earth,
Must I remember? Why, she would hang on him
As if increase of appetite had grown
By what it fed on. And yet, within a month
(Let me not think on ’t; frailty, thy name is woman!),
A little month, or ere those shoes were old
With which she followed my poor father’s body,
Like Niobe, all tears—why she, even she
(O God, a beast that wants discourse of reason
Would have mourned longer!), married with my
uncle,
My father’s brother, but no more like my father
Than I to Hercules. Within a month,
Ere yet the salt of most unrighteous tears
Had left the flushing in her gallèd eyes,
She married. O, most wicked speed, to post
With such dexterity to incestuous sheets!
It is not, nor it cannot come to good.
But break, my heart, for I must hold my tongue.
 
Enter Horatio, Marcellus, and Barnardo.
 
HORATIO  Hail to your Lordship.
HAMLET  I am glad to see you well.
Horatio—or I do forget myself!
HORATIO
The same, my lord, and your poor servant ever.
HAMLET
Sir, my good friend. I’ll change that name with you.
And what make you from Wittenberg, Horatio?—
Marcellus?
MARCELLUS  My good lord.
HAMLET
I am very glad to see you. To Barnardo. Good
even, sir.—
But what, in faith, make you from Wittenberg?
HORATIO
A truant disposition, good my lord.
HAMLET
I would not hear your enemy say so,
Nor shall you do my ear that violence
To make it truster of your own report
Against yourself. I know you are no truant.
But what is your affair in Elsinore?
We’ll teach you to drink deep ere you depart.
HORATIO
My lord, I came to see your father’s funeral.
HAMLET
I prithee, do not mock me, fellow student.
I think it was to see my mother’s wedding.
HORATIO
Indeed, my lord, it followed hard upon.
HAMLET
Thrift, thrift, Horatio. The funeral baked meats
Did coldly furnish forth the marriage tables.
Would I had met my dearest foe in heaven
Or ever I had seen that day, Horatio!
My father—methinks I see my father.
HORATIO
Where, my lord?
HAMLET  In my mind’s eye, Horatio.
HORATIO
I saw him once. He was a goodly king.
HAMLET
He was a man. Take him for all in all,
I shall not look upon his like again.
HORATIO
My lord, I think I saw him yesternight.
HAMLET  Saw who?
HORATIO
My lord, the King your father.
HAMLET  The King my father?
HORATIO
Season your admiration for a while
With an attent ear, till I may deliver
Upon the witness of these gentlemen
This marvel to you.
HAMLET  For God’s love, let me hear!
HORATIO
Two nights together had these gentlemen,
Marcellus and Barnardo, on their watch,
In the dead waste and middle of the night,
Been thus encountered: a figure like your father,
Armed at point exactly, cap-à-pie,
Appears before them and with solemn march
Goes slow and stately by them. Thrice he walked
By their oppressed and fear-surprisèd eyes
Within his truncheon’s length, whilst they, distilled
Almost to jelly with the act of fear,
Stand dumb and speak not to him. This to me
In dreadful secrecy impart they did,
And I with them the third night kept the watch,
Where, as they had delivered, both in time,
Form of the thing (each word made true and good),
The apparition comes. I knew your father;
These hands are not more like.
HAMLET  But where was this?
MARCELLUS
My lord, upon the platform where we watch.
HAMLET
Did you not speak to it?
HORATIO  My lord, I did,
But answer made it none. Yet once methought
It lifted up its head and did address
Itself to motion, like as it would speak;
But even then the morning cock crew loud,
And at the sound it shrunk in haste away
And vanished from our sight.
HAMLET  ’Tis very strange.
HORATIO
As I do live, my honored lord, ’tis true.
And we did think it writ down in our duty
To let you know of it.
HAMLET  Indeed, sirs, but this troubles me.
Hold you the watch tonight?
ALL  We do, my lord.
HAMLET
Armed, say you?
ALL  Armed, my lord.
HAMLET  From top to toe?
ALL  My lord, from head to foot.
HAMLET  Then saw you not his face?
HORATIO
O, yes, my lord, he wore his beaver up.
HAMLET  What, looked he frowningly?
HORATIO
A countenance more in sorrow than in anger.
HAMLET  Pale or red?
HORATIO
Nay, very pale.
HAMLET  And fixed his eyes upon you?
HORATIO
Most constantly.
HAMLET  I would I had been there.
HORATIO  It would have much amazed you.
HAMLET  Very like. Stayed it long?
HORATIO
While one with moderate haste might tell a
hundred.
BARNARDO/MARCELLUS  Longer, longer.
HORATIO
Not when I saw ’t.
HAMLET  His beard was grizzled, no?
HORATIO
It was as I have seen it in his life,
A sable silvered.
HAMLET  I will watch tonight.
Perchance ’twill walk again.
HORATIO  I warrant it will.
HAMLET
If it assume my noble father’s person,
I’ll speak to it, though hell itself should gape
And bid me hold my peace. I pray you all,
If you have hitherto concealed this sight,
Let it be tenable in your silence still;
And whatsomever else shall hap tonight,
Give it an understanding but no tongue.
I will requite your loves. So fare you well.
Upon the platform, ’twixt eleven and twelve,
I’ll visit you.
ALL  Our duty to your Honor.
HAMLET
Your loves, as mine to you. Farewell.
All but Hamlet exit.
My father’s spirit—in arms! All is not well.
I doubt some foul play. Would the night were come!
Till then, sit still, my soul. Foul deeds will rise,
Though all the earth o’erwhelm them, to men’s
eyes.
He exits.
 
Scene 3
Enter Laertes and Ophelia, his sister.
 
LAERTES
My necessaries are embarked. Farewell.
And, sister, as the winds give benefit
And convey is assistant, do not sleep,
But let me hear from you.
OPHELIA  Do you doubt that?
LAERTES
For Hamlet, and the trifling of his favor,
Hold it a fashion and a toy in blood,
A violet in the youth of primy nature,
Forward, not permanent, sweet, not lasting,
The perfume and suppliance of a minute,
No more.
OPHELIA  No more but so?
LAERTES  Think it no more.
For nature, crescent, does not grow alone
In thews and bulk, but, as this temple waxes,
The inward service of the mind and soul
Grows wide withal. Perhaps he loves you now,
And now no soil nor cautel doth besmirch
The virtue of his will; but you must fear,
His greatness weighed, his will is not his own,
For he himself is subject to his birth.
He may not, as unvalued persons do,
Carve for himself, for on his choice depends
The safety and the health of this whole state.
And therefore must his choice be circumscribed
Unto the voice and yielding of that body
Whereof he is the head. Then, if he says he loves
you,
It fits your wisdom so far to believe it
As he in his particular act and place
May give his saying deed, which is no further
Than the main voice of Denmark goes withal.
Then weigh what loss your honor may sustain
If with too credent ear you list his songs
Or lose your heart or your chaste treasure open
To his unmastered importunity.
Fear it, Ophelia; fear it, my dear sister,
And keep you in the rear of your affection,
Out of the shot and danger of desire.
The chariest maid is prodigal enough
If she unmask her beauty to the moon.
Virtue itself ’scapes not calumnious strokes.
The canker galls the infants of the spring
Too oft before their buttons be disclosed,
And, in the morn and liquid dew of youth,
Contagious blastments are most imminent.
Be wary, then; best safety lies in fear.
Youth to itself rebels, though none else near.
OPHELIA
I shall the effect of this good lesson keep
As watchman to my heart. But, good my brother,
Do not, as some ungracious pastors do,
Show me the steep and thorny way to heaven,
Whiles, like a puffed and reckless libertine,
Himself the primrose path of dalliance treads
And recks not his own rede.
LAERTES  O, fear me not.
 
Enter Polonius.
 
I stay too long. But here my father comes.
A double blessing is a double grace.
Occasion smiles upon a second leave.
POLONIUS
Yet here, Laertes? Aboard, aboard, for shame!
The wind sits in the shoulder of your sail,
And you are stayed for. There, my blessing with
thee.
And these few precepts in thy memory
Look thou character. Give thy thoughts no tongue,
Nor any unproportioned thought his act.
Be thou familiar, but by no means vulgar.
Those friends thou hast, and their adoption tried,
Grapple them unto thy soul with hoops of steel,
But do not dull thy palm with entertainment
Of each new-hatched, unfledged courage. Beware
Of entrance to a quarrel, but, being in,
Bear ’t that th’ opposèd may beware of thee.
Give every man thy ear, but few thy voice.
Take each man’s censure, but reserve thy judgment.
Costly thy habit as thy purse can buy,
But not expressed in fancy (rich, not gaudy),
For the apparel oft proclaims the man,
And they in France of the best rank and station
Are of a most select and generous chief in that.
Neither a borrower nor a lender be,
For loan oft loses both itself and friend,
And borrowing dulls the edge of husbandry.
This above all: to thine own self be true,
And it must follow, as the night the day,
Thou canst not then be false to any man.
Farewell. My blessing season this in thee.
LAERTES
Most humbly do I take my leave, my lord.
POLONIUS
The time invests you. Go, your servants tend.
LAERTES
Farewell, Ophelia, and remember well
What I have said to you.
OPHELIA  ’Tis in my memory locked,
And you yourself shall keep the key of it.
LAERTES  Farewell.                                                        	
Laertes exits.
POLONIUS
What is ’t, Ophelia, he hath said to you?
OPHELIA
So please you, something touching the Lord
Hamlet.
POLONIUS  Marry, well bethought.
’Tis told me he hath very oft of late
Given private time to you, and you yourself
Have of your audience been most free and
bounteous.
If it be so (as so ’tis put on me,
And that in way of caution), I must tell you
You do not understand yourself so clearly
As it behooves my daughter and your honor.
What is between you? Give me up the truth.
OPHELIA
He hath, my lord, of late made many tenders
Of his affection to me.
POLONIUS
Affection, puh! You speak like a green girl
Unsifted in such perilous circumstance.
Do you believe his “tenders,” as you call them?
OPHELIA
I do not know, my lord, what I should think.
POLONIUS
Marry, I will teach you. Think yourself a baby
That you have ta’en these tenders for true pay,
Which are not sterling. Tender yourself more dearly,
Or (not to crack the wind of the poor phrase,
Running it thus) you’ll tender me a fool.
OPHELIA
My lord, he hath importuned me with love
In honorable fashion—
POLONIUS
Ay, “fashion” you may call it. Go to, go to!
OPHELIA
And hath given countenance to his speech, my lord,
With almost all the holy vows of heaven.
POLONIUS
Ay, springes to catch woodcocks. I do know,
When the blood burns, how prodigal the soul
Lends the tongue vows. These blazes, daughter,
Giving more light than heat, extinct in both
Even in their promise as it is a-making,
You must not take for fire. From this time
Be something scanter of your maiden presence.
Set your entreatments at a higher rate
Than a command to parle. For Lord Hamlet,
Believe so much in him that he is young,
And with a larger tether may he walk
Than may be given you. In few, Ophelia,
Do not believe his vows, for they are brokers,
Not of that dye which their investments show,
But mere implorators of unholy suits,
Breathing like sanctified and pious bawds
The better to beguile. This is for all:
I would not, in plain terms, from this time forth
Have you so slander any moment leisure
As to give words or talk with the Lord Hamlet.
Look to ’t, I charge you. Come your ways.
OPHELIA  I shall obey, my lord.
They exit.
 
Scene 4
Enter Hamlet, Horatio, and Marcellus.
 
HAMLET
The air bites shrewdly; it is very cold.
HORATIO
It is a nipping and an eager air.
HAMLET  What hour now?
HORATIO  I think it lacks of twelve.
MARCELLUS  No, it is struck.
HORATIO
Indeed, I heard it not. It then draws near the season
Wherein the spirit held his wont to walk.
A flourish of trumpets and two pieces goes off.
What does this mean, my lord?
HAMLET
The King doth wake tonight and takes his rouse,
Keeps wassail, and the swagg’ring upspring reels;
And, as he drains his draughts of Rhenish down,
The kettledrum and trumpet thus bray out
The triumph of his pledge.
HORATIO  Is it a custom?
HAMLET  Ay, marry, is ’t,
But, to my mind, though I am native here
And to the manner born, it is a custom
More honored in the breach than the observance.
This heavy-headed revel east and west
Makes us traduced and taxed of other nations.
They clepe us drunkards and with swinish phrase
Soil our addition. And, indeed, it takes
From our achievements, though performed at
height,
The pith and marrow of our attribute.
So oft it chances in particular men
That for some vicious mole of nature in them,
As in their birth (wherein they are not guilty,
Since nature cannot choose his origin),
By the o’ergrowth of some complexion
(Oft breaking down the pales and forts of reason),
Or by some habit that too much o’erleavens
The form of plausive manners—that these men,
Carrying, I say, the stamp of one defect,
Being nature’s livery or fortune’s star,
His virtues else, be they as pure as grace,
As infinite as man may undergo,
Shall in the general censure take corruption
From that particular fault. The dram of evil
Doth all the noble substance of a doubt
To his own scandal.
 
Enter Ghost.
 
HORATIO  Look, my lord, it comes.
HAMLET
Angels and ministers of grace, defend us!
Be thou a spirit of health or goblin damned,
Bring with thee airs from heaven or blasts from
hell,
Be thy intents wicked or charitable,
Thou com’st in such a questionable shape
That I will speak to thee. I’ll call thee “Hamlet,”
“King,” “Father,” “Royal Dane.” O, answer me!
Let me not burst in ignorance, but tell
Why thy canonized bones, hearsèd in death,
Have burst their cerements; why the sepulcher,
Wherein we saw thee quietly interred,
Hath oped his ponderous and marble jaws
To cast thee up again. What may this mean
That thou, dead corse, again in complete steel,
Revisits thus the glimpses of the moon,
Making night hideous, and we fools of nature
So horridly to shake our disposition
With thoughts beyond the reaches of our souls?
Say, why is this? Wherefore? What should we do?
Ghost beckons.
HORATIO
It beckons you to go away with it
As if it some impartment did desire
To you alone.
MARCELLUS  Look with what courteous action
It waves you to a more removèd ground.
But do not go with it.
HORATIO  No, by no means.
HAMLET
It will not speak. Then I will follow it.
HORATIO
Do not, my lord.
HAMLET  Why, what should be the fear?
I do not set my life at a pin’s fee.
And for my soul, what can it do to that,
Being a thing immortal as itself?
It waves me forth again. I’ll follow it.
HORATIO
What if it tempt you toward the flood, my lord?
Or to the dreadful summit of the cliff
That beetles o’er his base into the sea,
And there assume some other horrible form
Which might deprive your sovereignty of reason
And draw you into madness? Think of it.
The very place puts toys of desperation,
Without more motive, into every brain
That looks so many fathoms to the sea
And hears it roar beneath.
HAMLET
It waves me still.—Go on, I’ll follow thee.
MARCELLUS
You shall not go, my lord.                          	
They hold back Hamlet.
HAMLET  Hold off your hands.
HORATIO
Be ruled. You shall not go.
HAMLET  My fate cries out
And makes each petty arture in this body
As hardy as the Nemean lion’s nerve.
Still am I called. Unhand me, gentlemen.
By heaven, I’ll make a ghost of him that lets me!
I say, away!—Go on. I’ll follow thee.
Ghost and Hamlet exit.
HORATIO
He waxes desperate with imagination.
MARCELLUS
Let’s follow. ’Tis not fit thus to obey him.
HORATIO
Have after. To what issue will this come?
MARCELLUS
Something is rotten in the state of Denmark.
HORATIO
Heaven will direct it.
MARCELLUS  Nay, let’s follow him.
They exit.
 
Scene 5
Enter Ghost and Hamlet.
 
HAMLET
Whither wilt thou lead me? Speak. I’ll go no
further.
GHOST
Mark me.
HAMLET  I will.
GHOST  My hour is almost come
When I to sulf’rous and tormenting flames
Must render up myself.
HAMLET  Alas, poor ghost!
GHOST
Pity me not, but lend thy serious hearing
To what I shall unfold.
HAMLET  Speak. I am bound to hear.
GHOST
So art thou to revenge, when thou shalt hear.
HAMLET  What?
GHOST  I am thy father’s spirit,
Doomed for a certain term to walk the night
And for the day confined to fast in fires
Till the foul crimes done in my days of nature
Are burnt and purged away. But that I am forbid
To tell the secrets of my prison house,
I could a tale unfold whose lightest word
Would harrow up thy soul, freeze thy young blood,
Make thy two eyes, like stars, start from their
spheres,
Thy knotted and combinèd locks to part,
And each particular hair to stand an end,
Like quills upon the fearful porpentine.
But this eternal blazon must not be
To ears of flesh and blood. List, list, O list!
If thou didst ever thy dear father love—
HAMLET  O God!
GHOST
Revenge his foul and most unnatural murder.
HAMLET  Murder?
GHOST
Murder most foul, as in the best it is,
But this most foul, strange, and unnatural.
HAMLET
Haste me to know ’t, that I, with wings as swift
As meditation or the thoughts of love,
May sweep to my revenge.
GHOST  I find thee apt;
And duller shouldst thou be than the fat weed
That roots itself in ease on Lethe wharf,
Wouldst thou not stir in this. Now, Hamlet, hear.
’Tis given out that, sleeping in my orchard,
A serpent stung me. So the whole ear of Denmark
Is by a forgèd process of my death
Rankly abused. But know, thou noble youth,
The serpent that did sting thy father’s life
Now wears his crown.
HAMLET  O, my prophetic soul! My uncle!
GHOST
Ay, that incestuous, that adulterate beast,
With witchcraft of his wits, with traitorous gifts—
O wicked wit and gifts, that have the power
So to seduce!—won to his shameful lust
The will of my most seeming-virtuous queen.
O Hamlet, what a falling off was there!
From me, whose love was of that dignity
That it went hand in hand even with the vow
I made to her in marriage, and to decline
Upon a wretch whose natural gifts were poor
To those of mine.
But virtue, as it never will be moved,
Though lewdness court it in a shape of heaven,
So, lust, though to a radiant angel linked,
Will sate itself in a celestial bed
And prey on garbage.
But soft, methinks I scent the morning air.
Brief let me be. Sleeping within my orchard,
My custom always of the afternoon,
Upon my secure hour thy uncle stole
With juice of cursèd hebona in a vial
And in the porches of my ears did pour
The leprous distilment, whose effect
Holds such an enmity with blood of man
That swift as quicksilver it courses through
The natural gates and alleys of the body,
And with a sudden vigor it doth posset
And curd, like eager droppings into milk,
The thin and wholesome blood. So did it mine,
And a most instant tetter barked about,
Most lazar-like, with vile and loathsome crust
All my smooth body.
Thus was I, sleeping, by a brother’s hand
Of life, of crown, of queen at once dispatched,
Cut off, even in the blossoms of my sin,
Unhouseled, disappointed, unaneled,
No reck’ning made, but sent to my account
With all my imperfections on my head.
O horrible, O horrible, most horrible!
If thou hast nature in thee, bear it not.
Let not the royal bed of Denmark be
A couch for luxury and damnèd incest.
But, howsomever thou pursues this act,
Taint not thy mind, nor let thy soul contrive
Against thy mother aught. Leave her to heaven
And to those thorns that in her bosom lodge
To prick and sting her. Fare thee well at once.
The glowworm shows the matin to be near
And ’gins to pale his uneffectual fire.
Adieu, adieu, adieu. Remember me.                                   	
He exits.
HAMLET
O all you host of heaven! O Earth! What else?
And shall I couple hell? O fie! Hold, hold, my heart,
And you, my sinews, grow not instant old,
But bear me stiffly up. Remember thee?
Ay, thou poor ghost, whiles memory holds a seat
In this distracted globe. Remember thee?
Yea, from the table of my memory
I’ll wipe away all trivial, fond records,
All saws of books, all forms, all pressures past,
That youth and observation copied there,
And thy commandment all alone shall live
Within the book and volume of my brain,
Unmixed with baser matter. Yes, by heaven!
O most pernicious woman!
O villain, villain, smiling, damnèd villain!
My tables—meet it is I set it down
That one may smile and smile and be a villain.
At least I am sure it may be so in Denmark.
He writes.
So, uncle, there you are. Now to my word.
It is “adieu, adieu, remember me.”
I have sworn ’t.
 
Enter Horatio and Marcellus.
 
HORATIO  My lord, my lord!
MARCELLUS  Lord Hamlet.
HORATIO  Heavens secure him!
HAMLET  So be it.
MARCELLUS  Illo, ho, ho, my lord!
HAMLET  Hillo, ho, ho, boy! Come, bird, come!
MARCELLUS
How is ’t, my noble lord?
HORATIO  What news, my lord?
HAMLET  O, wonderful!
HORATIO
Good my lord, tell it.
HAMLET  No, you will reveal it.
HORATIO
Not I, my lord, by heaven.
MARCELLUS  Nor I, my lord.
HAMLET
How say you, then? Would heart of man once think
it?
But you’ll be secret?
HORATIO/MARCELLUS   Ay, by heaven, my lord.
HAMLET
There’s never a villain dwelling in all Denmark
But he’s an arrant knave.
HORATIO
There needs no ghost, my lord, come from the grave
To tell us this.
HAMLET  Why, right, you are in the right.
And so, without more circumstance at all,
I hold it fit that we shake hands and part,
You, as your business and desire shall point you
(For every man hath business and desire,
Such as it is), and for my own poor part,
I will go pray.
HORATIO
These are but wild and whirling words, my lord.
HAMLET
I am sorry they offend you, heartily;
Yes, faith, heartily.
HORATIO  There’s no offense, my lord.
HAMLET
Yes, by Saint Patrick, but there is, Horatio,
And much offense, too. Touching this vision here,
It is an honest ghost—that let me tell you.
For your desire to know what is between us,
O’ermaster ’t as you may. And now, good friends,
As you are friends, scholars, and soldiers,
Give me one poor request.
HORATIO  What is ’t, my lord? We will.
HAMLET
Never make known what you have seen tonight.
HORATIO/MARCELLUS   My lord, we will not.
HAMLET  Nay, but swear ’t.
HORATIO  In faith, my lord, not I.
MARCELLUS  Nor I, my lord, in faith.
HAMLET
Upon my sword.
MARCELLUS  We have sworn, my lord, already.
HAMLET  Indeed, upon my sword, indeed.
GHOST cries under the stage  Swear.
HAMLET
Ha, ha, boy, sayst thou so? Art thou there,
truepenny?
Come on, you hear this fellow in the cellarage.
Consent to swear.
HORATIO  Propose the oath, my lord.
HAMLET
Never to speak of this that you have seen,
Swear by my sword.
GHOST, beneath  Swear.
HAMLET
Hic et ubique? Then we’ll shift our ground.
Come hither, gentlemen,
And lay your hands again upon my sword.
Swear by my sword
Never to speak of this that you have heard.
GHOST, beneath  Swear by his sword.
HAMLET
Well said, old mole. Canst work i’ th’ earth so fast?—
A worthy pioner! Once more remove, good friends.
HORATIO
O day and night, but this is wondrous strange.
HAMLET
And therefore as a stranger give it welcome.
There are more things in heaven and earth, Horatio,
Than are dreamt of in your philosophy. But come.
Here, as before, never, so help you mercy,
How strange or odd some’er I bear myself
(As I perchance hereafter shall think meet
To put an antic disposition on)
That you, at such times seeing me, never shall,
With arms encumbered thus, or this headshake,
Or by pronouncing of some doubtful phrase,
As “Well, well, we know,” or “We could an if we
would,”
Or “If we list to speak,” or “There be an if they
might,”
Or such ambiguous giving-out, to note
That you know aught of me—this do swear,
So grace and mercy at your most need help you.
GHOST, beneath  Swear.
HAMLET
Rest, rest, perturbèd spirit.—So, gentlemen,
With all my love I do commend me to you,
And what so poor a man as Hamlet is
May do t’ express his love and friending to you,
God willing, shall not lack. Let us go in together,
And still your fingers on your lips, I pray.
The time is out of joint. O cursèd spite
That ever I was born to set it right!
Nay, come, let’s go together.
They exit.
 
 
 

 
 
ACT 2
 
Scene 1
Enter old Polonius with his man Reynaldo.
 
POLONIUS
Give him this money and these notes, Reynaldo.
REYNALDO  I will, my lord.
POLONIUS
You shall do marvelous wisely, good Reynaldo,
Before you visit him, to make inquire
Of his behavior.
REYNALDO  My lord, I did intend it.
POLONIUS
Marry, well said, very well said. Look you, sir,
Inquire me first what Danskers are in Paris;
And how, and who, what means, and where they
keep,
What company, at what expense; and finding
By this encompassment and drift of question
That they do know my son, come you more nearer
Than your particular demands will touch it.
Take you, as ’twere, some distant knowledge of him,
As thus: “I know his father and his friends
And, in part, him.” Do you mark this, Reynaldo?
REYNALDO  Ay, very well, my lord.
POLONIUS
“And, in part, him, but,” you may say, “not well.
But if ’t be he I mean, he’s very wild,
Addicted so and so.” And there put on him
What forgeries you please—marry, none so rank
As may dishonor him, take heed of that,
But, sir, such wanton, wild, and usual slips
As are companions noted and most known
To youth and liberty.
REYNALDO  As gaming, my lord.
POLONIUS  Ay, or drinking, fencing, swearing,
Quarreling, drabbing—you may go so far.
REYNALDO  My lord, that would dishonor him.
POLONIUS
Faith, no, as you may season it in the charge.
You must not put another scandal on him
That he is open to incontinency;
That’s not my meaning. But breathe his faults so
quaintly
That they may seem the taints of liberty,
The flash and outbreak of a fiery mind,
A savageness in unreclaimèd blood,
Of general assault.
REYNALDO  But, my good lord—
POLONIUS  Wherefore should you do this?
REYNALDO  Ay, my lord, I would know that.
POLONIUS  Marry, sir, here’s my drift,
And I believe it is a fetch of wit.
You, laying these slight sullies on my son,
As ’twere a thing a little soiled i’ th’ working,
Mark you, your party in converse, him you would
sound,
Having ever seen in the prenominate crimes
The youth you breathe of guilty, be assured
He closes with you in this consequence:
“Good sir,” or so, or “friend,” or “gentleman,”
According to the phrase or the addition
Of man and country—
REYNALDO  Very good, my lord.
POLONIUS  And then, sir, does he this, he does—what
was I about to say? By the Mass, I was about to say
something. Where did I leave?
REYNALDO  At “closes in the consequence,” at “friend,
or so,” and “gentleman.”
POLONIUS
At “closes in the consequence”—ay, marry—
He closes thus: “I know the gentleman.
I saw him yesterday,” or “th’ other day”
(Or then, or then, with such or such), “and as you
say,
There was he gaming, there o’ertook in ’s rouse,
There falling out at tennis”; or perchance
“I saw him enter such a house of sale”—
Videlicet, a brothel—or so forth. See you now
Your bait of falsehood take this carp of truth;
And thus do we of wisdom and of reach,
With windlasses and with assays of bias,
By indirections find directions out.
So by my former lecture and advice
Shall you my son. You have me, have you not?
REYNALDO
My lord, I have.
POLONIUS  God be wi’ you. Fare you well.
REYNALDO  Good my lord.
POLONIUS
Observe his inclination in yourself.
REYNALDO  I shall, my lord.
POLONIUS  And let him ply his music.
REYNALDO  Well, my lord.
POLONIUS
Farewell.                                                                     	
Reynaldo exits.
 
Enter Ophelia.
 
How now, Ophelia, what’s the matter?
OPHELIA
O, my lord, my lord, I have been so affrighted!
POLONIUS  With what, i’ th’ name of God?
OPHELIA
My lord, as I was sewing in my closet,
Lord Hamlet, with his doublet all unbraced,
No hat upon his head, his stockings fouled,
Ungartered, and down-gyvèd to his ankle,
Pale as his shirt, his knees knocking each other,
And with a look so piteous in purport
As if he had been loosèd out of hell
To speak of horrors—he comes before me.
POLONIUS
Mad for thy love?
OPHELIA  My lord, I do not know,
But truly I do fear it.
POLONIUS  What said he?
OPHELIA
He took me by the wrist and held me hard.
Then goes he to the length of all his arm,
And, with his other hand thus o’er his brow,
He falls to such perusal of my face
As he would draw it. Long stayed he so.
At last, a little shaking of mine arm,
And thrice his head thus waving up and down,
He raised a sigh so piteous and profound
As it did seem to shatter all his bulk
And end his being. That done, he lets me go,
And, with his head over his shoulder turned,
He seemed to find his way without his eyes,
For out o’ doors he went without their helps
And to the last bended their light on me.
POLONIUS
Come, go with me. I will go seek the King.
This is the very ecstasy of love,
Whose violent property fordoes itself
And leads the will to desperate undertakings
As oft as any passions under heaven
That does afflict our natures. I am sorry.
What, have you given him any hard words of late?
OPHELIA
No, my good lord, but as you did command
I did repel his letters and denied
His access to me.
POLONIUS  That hath made him mad.
I am sorry that with better heed and judgment
I had not coted him. I feared he did but trifle
And meant to wrack thee. But beshrew my jealousy!
By heaven, it is as proper to our age
To cast beyond ourselves in our opinions
As it is common for the younger sort
To lack discretion. Come, go we to the King.
This must be known, which, being kept close, might
move
More grief to hide than hate to utter love.
Come.
They exit.
 
Scene 2
Flourish. Enter King and Queen, Rosencrantz and
Guildenstern and Attendants.
 
KING
Welcome, dear Rosencrantz and Guildenstern.
Moreover that we much did long to see you,
The need we have to use you did provoke
Our hasty sending. Something have you heard
Of Hamlet’s transformation, so call it,
Sith nor th’ exterior nor the inward man
Resembles that it was. What it should be,
More than his father’s death, that thus hath put him
So much from th’ understanding of himself
I cannot dream of. I entreat you both
That, being of so young days brought up with him
And sith so neighbored to his youth and havior,
That you vouchsafe your rest here in our court
Some little time, so by your companies
To draw him on to pleasures, and to gather
So much as from occasion you may glean,
Whether aught to us unknown afflicts him thus
That, opened, lies within our remedy.
QUEEN
Good gentlemen, he hath much talked of you,
And sure I am two men there is not living
To whom he more adheres. If it will please you
To show us so much gentry and goodwill
As to expend your time with us awhile
For the supply and profit of our hope,
Your visitation shall receive such thanks
As fits a king’s remembrance.
ROSENCRANTZ  Both your Majesties
Might, by the sovereign power you have of us,
Put your dread pleasures more into command
Than to entreaty.
GUILDENSTERN  But we both obey,
And here give up ourselves in the full bent
To lay our service freely at your feet,
To be commanded.
KING
Thanks, Rosencrantz and gentle Guildenstern.
QUEEN
Thanks, Guildenstern and gentle Rosencrantz.
And I beseech you instantly to visit
My too much changèd son.—Go, some of you,
And bring these gentlemen where Hamlet is.
GUILDENSTERN
Heavens make our presence and our practices
Pleasant and helpful to him!
QUEEN  Ay, amen!
Rosencrantz and Guildenstern exit
with some Attendants.
 
Enter Polonius.
 
POLONIUS
Th’ ambassadors from Norway, my good lord,
Are joyfully returned.
KING
Thou still hast been the father of good news.
POLONIUS
Have I, my lord? I assure my good liege
I hold my duty as I hold my soul,
Both to my God and to my gracious king,
And I do think, or else this brain of mine
Hunts not the trail of policy so sure
As it hath used to do, that I have found
The very cause of Hamlet’s lunacy.
KING
O, speak of that! That do I long to hear.
POLONIUS
Give first admittance to th’ ambassadors.
My news shall be the fruit to that great feast.
KING
Thyself do grace to them and bring them in.
Polonius exits.
He tells me, my dear Gertrude, he hath found
The head and source of all your son’s distemper.
QUEEN
I doubt it is no other but the main—
His father’s death and our o’erhasty marriage.
KING
Well, we shall sift him.
 
Enter Ambassadors Voltemand and Cornelius with
Polonius.
 
Welcome, my good friends.
Say, Voltemand, what from our brother Norway?
VOLTEMAND
Most fair return of greetings and desires.
Upon our first, he sent out to suppress
His nephew’s levies, which to him appeared
To be a preparation ’gainst the Polack,
But, better looked into, he truly found
It was against your Highness. Whereat, grieved
That so his sickness, age, and impotence
Was falsely borne in hand, sends out arrests
On Fortinbras, which he, in brief, obeys,
Receives rebuke from Norway, and, in fine,
Makes vow before his uncle never more
To give th’ assay of arms against your Majesty.
Whereon old Norway, overcome with joy,
Gives him three-score thousand crowns in annual
fee
And his commission to employ those soldiers,
So levied as before, against the Polack,
With an entreaty, herein further shown,
He gives a paper.
That it might please you to give quiet pass
Through your dominions for this enterprise,
On such regards of safety and allowance
As therein are set down.
KING  It likes us well,
And, at our more considered time, we’ll read,
Answer, and think upon this business.
Meantime, we thank you for your well-took labor.
Go to your rest. At night we’ll feast together.
Most welcome home!
Voltemand and Cornelius exit.
POLONIUS  This business is well ended.
My liege, and madam, to expostulate
What majesty should be, what duty is,
Why day is day, night night, and time is time
Were nothing but to waste night, day, and time.
Therefore, since brevity is the soul of wit,
And tediousness the limbs and outward flourishes,
I will be brief. Your noble son is mad.
“Mad” call I it, for, to define true madness,
What is ’t but to be nothing else but mad?
But let that go.
QUEEN  More matter with less art.
POLONIUS
Madam, I swear I use no art at all.
That he’s mad, ’tis true; ’tis true ’tis pity,
And pity ’tis ’tis true—a foolish figure,
But farewell it, for I will use no art.
Mad let us grant him then, and now remains
That we find out the cause of this effect,
Or, rather say, the cause of this defect,
For this effect defective comes by cause.
Thus it remains, and the remainder thus.
Perpend.
I have a daughter (have while she is mine)
Who, in her duty and obedience, mark,
Hath given me this. Now gather and surmise.
He reads. To the celestial, and my soul’s idol, the
most beautified Ophelia—
That’s an ill phrase, a vile phrase; “beautified” is a
vile phrase. But you shall hear. Thus: He reads.
In her excellent white bosom, these, etc.—
QUEEN  Came this from Hamlet to her?
POLONIUS
Good madam, stay awhile. I will be faithful.
He reads the letter.
       	Doubt thou the stars are fire,
       	   Doubt that the sun doth move,
       	Doubt truth to be a liar,
       	   But never doubt I love.
O dear Ophelia, I am ill at these numbers. I have not
art to reckon my groans, but that I love thee best, O
most best, believe it. Adieu.
Thine evermore, most dear lady, whilst
this machine is to him, Hamlet.
This, in obedience, hath my daughter shown me,
And more above, hath his solicitings,
As they fell out by time, by means, and place,
All given to mine ear.
KING  But how hath she received his love?
POLONIUS  What do you think of me?
KING
As of a man faithful and honorable.
POLONIUS
I would fain prove so. But what might you think,
When I had seen this hot love on the wing
(As I perceived it, I must tell you that,
Before my daughter told me), what might you,
Or my dear Majesty your queen here, think,
If I had played the desk or table-book
Or given my heart a winking, mute and dumb,
Or looked upon this love with idle sight?
What might you think? No, I went round to work,
And my young mistress thus I did bespeak:
“Lord Hamlet is a prince, out of thy star.
This must not be.” And then I prescripts gave her,
That she should lock herself from his resort,
Admit no messengers, receive no tokens;
Which done, she took the fruits of my advice,
And he, repelled (a short tale to make),
Fell into a sadness, then into a fast,
Thence to a watch, thence into a weakness,
Thence to a lightness, and, by this declension,
Into the madness wherein now he raves
And all we mourn for.
KING, to Queen  Do you think ’tis this?
QUEEN  It may be, very like.
POLONIUS
Hath there been such a time (I would fain know
that)
That I have positively said “’Tis so,”
When it proved otherwise?
KING  Not that I know.
POLONIUS
Take this from this, if this be otherwise.
If circumstances lead me, I will find
Where truth is hid, though it were hid, indeed,
Within the center.
KING  How may we try it further?
POLONIUS
You know sometimes he walks four hours together
Here in the lobby.
QUEEN  So he does indeed.
POLONIUS
At such a time I’ll loose my daughter to him.
To the King. Be you and I behind an arras then.
Mark the encounter. If he love her not,
And be not from his reason fall’n thereon,
Let me be no assistant for a state,
But keep a farm and carters.
KING  We will try it.
 
Enter Hamlet reading on a book.
 
QUEEN
But look where sadly the poor wretch comes
reading.
POLONIUS
Away, I do beseech you both, away.
I’ll board him presently. O, give me leave.
King and Queen exit with Attendants.
How does my good Lord Hamlet?
HAMLET  Well, God-a-mercy.
POLONIUS  Do you know me, my lord?
HAMLET  Excellent well. You are a fishmonger.
POLONIUS  Not I, my lord.
HAMLET  Then I would you were so honest a man.
POLONIUS  Honest, my lord?
HAMLET  Ay, sir. To be honest, as this world goes, is to
be one man picked out of ten thousand.
POLONIUS  That’s very true, my lord.
HAMLET  For if the sun breed maggots in a dead
dog, being a good kissing carrion—Have you a
daughter?
POLONIUS  I have, my lord.
HAMLET  Let her not walk i’ th’ sun. Conception is a
blessing, but, as your daughter may conceive,
friend, look to ’t.
POLONIUS, aside  How say you by that? Still harping on
my daughter. Yet he knew me not at first; he said I
was a fishmonger. He is far gone. And truly, in my
youth, I suffered much extremity for love, very near
this. I’ll speak to him again.—What do you read, my
lord?
HAMLET  Words, words, words.
POLONIUS  What is the matter, my lord?
HAMLET  Between who?
POLONIUS  I mean the matter that you read, my lord.
HAMLET  Slanders, sir; for the satirical rogue says here
that old men have gray beards, that their faces are
wrinkled, their eyes purging thick amber and
plum-tree gum, and that they have a plentiful lack of
wit, together with most weak hams; all which, sir,
though I most powerfully and potently believe, yet I
hold it not honesty to have it thus set down; for
yourself, sir, shall grow old as I am, if, like a crab,
you could go backward.
POLONIUS, aside  Though this be madness, yet there is
method in ’t.—Will you walk out of the air, my lord?
HAMLET  Into my grave?
POLONIUS  Indeed, that’s out of the air. Aside. How
pregnant sometimes his replies are! A happiness
that often madness hits on, which reason and
sanity could not so prosperously be delivered of. I
will leave him and suddenly contrive the means of
meeting between him and my daughter.—My lord,
I will take my leave of you.
HAMLET  You cannot, sir, take from me anything that I
will more willingly part withal—except my life,
except my life, except my life.
POLONIUS  Fare you well, my lord.
HAMLET, aside  These tedious old fools.
 
Enter Guildenstern and Rosencrantz.
 
POLONIUS  You go to seek the Lord Hamlet. There he is.
ROSENCRANTZ, to Polonius  God save you, sir.
Polonius exits.
GUILDENSTERN  My honored lord.
ROSENCRANTZ  My most dear lord.
HAMLET  My excellent good friends! How dost thou,
Guildenstern? Ah, Rosencrantz! Good lads, how do
you both?
ROSENCRANTZ
As the indifferent children of the earth.
GUILDENSTERN
Happy in that we are not overhappy.
On Fortune’s cap, we are not the very button.
HAMLET  Nor the soles of her shoe?
ROSENCRANTZ  Neither, my lord.
HAMLET  Then you live about her waist, or in the
middle of her favors?
GUILDENSTERN  Faith, her privates we.
HAMLET  In the secret parts of Fortune? O, most true!
She is a strumpet. What news?
ROSENCRANTZ  None, my lord, but that the world’s
grown honest.
HAMLET  Then is doomsday near. But your news is not
true. Let me question more in particular. What
have you, my good friends, deserved at the hands of
Fortune that she sends you to prison hither?
GUILDENSTERN  Prison, my lord?
HAMLET  Denmark’s a prison.
ROSENCRANTZ  Then is the world one.
HAMLET  A goodly one, in which there are many confines,
wards, and dungeons, Denmark being one o’
th’ worst.
ROSENCRANTZ  We think not so, my lord.
HAMLET  Why, then, ’tis none to you, for there is
nothing either good or bad but thinking makes it
so. To me, it is a prison.
ROSENCRANTZ  Why, then, your ambition makes it one.
’Tis too narrow for your mind.
HAMLET  O God, I could be bounded in a nutshell and
count myself a king of infinite space, were it not
that I have bad dreams.
GUILDENSTERN  Which dreams, indeed, are ambition,
for the very substance of the ambitious is merely
the shadow of a dream.
HAMLET  A dream itself is but a shadow.
ROSENCRANTZ  Truly, and I hold ambition of so airy
and light a quality that it is but a shadow’s shadow.
HAMLET  Then are our beggars bodies, and our monarchs
and outstretched heroes the beggars’ shadows.
Shall we to th’ court? For, by my fay, I cannot
reason.
ROSENCRANTZ/GUILDENSTERN  We’ll wait upon you.
HAMLET  No such matter. I will not sort you with the
rest of my servants, for, to speak to you like an
honest man, I am most dreadfully attended. But,
in the beaten way of friendship, what make you at
Elsinore?
ROSENCRANTZ  To visit you, my lord, no other occasion.
HAMLET  Beggar that I am, I am even poor in thanks;
but I thank you, and sure, dear friends, my thanks
are too dear a halfpenny. Were you not sent for?
Is it your own inclining? Is it a free visitation?
Come, come, deal justly with me. Come, come; nay,
speak.
GUILDENSTERN  What should we say, my lord?
HAMLET  Anything but to th’ purpose. You were sent
for, and there is a kind of confession in your looks
which your modesties have not craft enough to
color. I know the good king and queen have sent for
you.
ROSENCRANTZ  To what end, my lord?
HAMLET  That you must teach me. But let me conjure
you by the rights of our fellowship, by the consonancy
of our youth, by the obligation of our ever-preserved
love, and by what more dear a better
proposer can charge you withal: be even and direct
with me whether you were sent for or no.
ROSENCRANTZ, to Guildenstern  What say you?
HAMLET, aside  Nay, then, I have an eye of you.—If
you love me, hold not off.
GUILDENSTERN  My lord, we were sent for.
HAMLET  I will tell you why; so shall my anticipation
prevent your discovery, and your secrecy to the
King and Queen molt no feather. I have of late, but
wherefore I know not, lost all my mirth, forgone all
custom of exercises, and, indeed, it goes so heavily
with my disposition that this goodly frame, the
Earth, seems to me a sterile promontory; this most
excellent canopy, the air, look you, this brave o’erhanging
firmament, this majestical roof, fretted
with golden fire—why, it appeareth nothing to me
but a foul and pestilent congregation of vapors.
What a piece of work is a man, how noble in
reason, how infinite in faculties, in form and moving
how express and admirable; in action how like
an angel, in apprehension how like a god: the
beauty of the world, the paragon of animals—and
yet, to me, what is this quintessence of dust? Man
delights not me, no, nor women neither, though by
your smiling you seem to say so.
ROSENCRANTZ  My lord, there was no such stuff in my
thoughts.
HAMLET  Why did you laugh, then, when I said “man
delights not me”?
ROSENCRANTZ  To think, my lord, if you delight not in
man, what Lenten entertainment the players shall
receive from you. We coted them on the way, and
hither are they coming to offer you service.
HAMLET  He that plays the king shall be welcome—his
Majesty shall have tribute on me. The adventurous
knight shall use his foil and target, the lover shall
not sigh gratis, the humorous man shall end his
part in peace, the clown shall make those laugh
whose lungs are tickle o’ th’ sear, and the lady
shall say her mind freely, or the blank verse shall
halt for ’t. What players are they?
ROSENCRANTZ  Even those you were wont to take such
delight in, the tragedians of the city.
HAMLET  How chances it they travel? Their residence,
both in reputation and profit, was better both ways.
ROSENCRANTZ  I think their inhibition comes by the
means of the late innovation.
HAMLET  Do they hold the same estimation they did
when I was in the city? Are they so followed?
ROSENCRANTZ  No, indeed are they not.
HAMLET  How comes it? Do they grow rusty?
ROSENCRANTZ  Nay, their endeavor keeps in the wonted
pace. But there is, sir, an aerie of children, little
eyases, that cry out on the top of question and are
most tyrannically clapped for ’t. These are now the
fashion and so berattle the common stages (so
they call them) that many wearing rapiers are afraid
of goose quills and dare scarce come thither.
HAMLET  What, are they children? Who maintains ’em?
How are they escoted? Will they pursue the quality
no longer than they can sing? Will they not say
afterwards, if they should grow themselves to common
players (as it is most like, if their means are
no better), their writers do them wrong to make
them exclaim against their own succession?
ROSENCRANTZ  Faith, there has been much to-do on
both sides, and the nation holds it no sin to tar
them to controversy. There was for a while no
money bid for argument unless the poet and the
player went to cuffs in the question.
HAMLET  Is ’t possible?
GUILDENSTERN  O, there has been much throwing
about of brains.
HAMLET  Do the boys carry it away?
ROSENCRANTZ  Ay, that they do, my lord—Hercules
and his load too.
HAMLET  It is not very strange; for my uncle is King of
Denmark, and those that would make mouths at
him while my father lived give twenty, forty, fifty,
a hundred ducats apiece for his picture in little.
’Sblood, there is something in this more than natural,
if philosophy could find it out.
A flourish for the Players.
GUILDENSTERN  There are the players.
HAMLET  Gentlemen, you are welcome to Elsinore.
Your hands, come then. Th’ appurtenance of welcome
is fashion and ceremony. Let me comply
with you in this garb, lest my extent to the players,
which, I tell you, must show fairly outwards, should
more appear like entertainment than yours. You are
welcome. But my uncle-father and aunt-mother are
deceived.
GUILDENSTERN  In what, my dear lord?
HAMLET  I am but mad north-north-west. When the
wind is southerly, I know a hawk from a handsaw.
 
Enter Polonius.
 
POLONIUS  Well be with you, gentlemen.
HAMLET  Hark you, Guildenstern, and you too—at
each ear a hearer! That great baby you see there is
not yet out of his swaddling clouts.
ROSENCRANTZ  Haply he is the second time come to
them, for they say an old man is twice a child.
HAMLET  I will prophesy he comes to tell me of the
players; mark it.—You say right, sir, a Monday
morning, ’twas then indeed.
POLONIUS  My lord, I have news to tell you.
HAMLET  My lord, I have news to tell you: when Roscius
was an actor in Rome—
POLONIUS  The actors are come hither, my lord.
HAMLET  Buzz, buzz.
POLONIUS  Upon my honor—
HAMLET  Then came each actor on his ass.
POLONIUS  The best actors in the world, either for
tragedy, comedy, history, pastoral, pastoral-comical,
historical-pastoral, tragical-historical,
tragical-comical-historical-pastoral, scene individable, or
poem unlimited. Seneca cannot be too heavy, nor
Plautus too light. For the law of writ and the liberty,
these are the only men.
HAMLET  O Jephthah, judge of Israel, what a treasure
hadst thou!
POLONIUS  What a treasure had he, my lord?
HAMLET  Why,
       	One fair daughter, and no more,
       	The which he lovèd passing well.
POLONIUS, aside  Still on my daughter.
HAMLET  Am I not i’ th’ right, old Jephthah?
POLONIUS  If you call me “Jephthah,” my lord: I have a
daughter that I love passing well.
HAMLET  Nay, that follows not.
POLONIUS  What follows then, my lord?
HAMLET  Why,
       	As by lot, God wot
and then, you know,
       	It came to pass, as most like it was—
the first row of the pious chanson will show you
more, for look where my abridgment comes.
 
Enter the Players.
 
You are welcome, masters; welcome all.—I am glad
to see thee well.—Welcome, good friends.—O my
old friend! Why, thy face is valanced since I saw thee
last. Com’st thou to beard me in Denmark?—What,
my young lady and mistress! By ’r Lady, your Ladyship
is nearer to heaven than when I saw you last, by
the altitude of a chopine. Pray God your voice, like a
piece of uncurrent gold, be not cracked within the
ring. Masters, you are all welcome. We’ll e’en to ’t
like French falconers, fly at anything we see. We’ll
have a speech straight. Come, give us a taste of your
quality. Come, a passionate speech.
FIRST PLAYER  What speech, my good lord?
HAMLET  I heard thee speak me a speech once, but it
was never acted, or, if it was, not above once; for
the play, I remember, pleased not the million:
’twas caviary to the general. But it was (as I
received it, and others whose judgments in such
matters cried in the top of mine) an excellent play,
well digested in the scenes, set down with as much
modesty as cunning. I remember one said there
were no sallets in the lines to make the matter
savory, nor no matter in the phrase that might indict
the author of affection, but called it an honest
method, as wholesome as sweet and, by very much,
more handsome than fine. One speech in ’t I
chiefly loved. ’Twas Aeneas’ tale to Dido, and
thereabout of it especially when he speaks of
Priam’s slaughter. If it live in your memory, begin at
this line—let me see, let me see:
The rugged Pyrrhus, like th’ Hyrcanian beast—
’tis not so; it begins with Pyrrhus:
The rugged Pyrrhus, he whose sable arms,
Black as his purpose, did the night resemble
When he lay couchèd in th’ ominous horse,
Hath now this dread and black complexion smeared
With heraldry more dismal. Head to foot,
Now is he total gules, horridly tricked
With blood of fathers, mothers, daughters, sons,
Baked and impasted with the parching streets,
That lend a tyrannous and a damnèd light
To their lord’s murder. Roasted in wrath and fire,
And thus o’ersizèd with coagulate gore,
With eyes like carbuncles, the hellish Pyrrhus
Old grandsire Priam seeks.
So, proceed you.
POLONIUS  ’Fore God, my lord, well spoken, with good
accent and good discretion.
FIRST PLAYER  Anon he finds him
Striking too short at Greeks. His antique sword,
Rebellious to his arm, lies where it falls,
Repugnant to command. Unequal matched,
Pyrrhus at Priam drives, in rage strikes wide;
But with the whiff and wind of his fell sword
Th’ unnervèd father falls. Then senseless Ilium,
Seeming to feel this blow, with flaming top
Stoops to his base, and with a hideous crash
Takes prisoner Pyrrhus’ ear. For lo, his sword,
Which was declining on the milky head
Of reverend Priam, seemed i’ th’ air to stick.
So as a painted tyrant Pyrrhus stood
And, like a neutral to his will and matter,
Did nothing.
But as we often see against some storm
A silence in the heavens, the rack stand still,
The bold winds speechless, and the orb below
As hush as death, anon the dreadful thunder
Doth rend the region; so, after Pyrrhus’ pause,
Arousèd vengeance sets him new a-work,
And never did the Cyclops’ hammers fall
On Mars’s armor, forged for proof eterne,
With less remorse than Pyrrhus’ bleeding sword
Now falls on Priam.
Out, out, thou strumpet Fortune! All you gods
In general synod take away her power,
Break all the spokes and fellies from her wheel,
And bowl the round nave down the hill of heaven
As low as to the fiends!
POLONIUS  This is too long.
HAMLET  It shall to the barber’s with your beard.—
Prithee say on. He’s for a jig or a tale of bawdry, or
he sleeps. Say on; come to Hecuba.
FIRST PLAYER
But who, ah woe, had seen the moblèd queen—
HAMLET  “The moblèd queen”?
POLONIUS  That’s good. “Moblèd queen” is good.
FIRST PLAYER
Run barefoot up and down, threat’ning the flames
With bisson rheum, a clout upon that head
Where late the diadem stood, and for a robe,
About her lank and all o’erteemèd loins
A blanket, in the alarm of fear caught up—
Who this had seen, with tongue in venom steeped,
’Gainst Fortune’s state would treason have
pronounced.
But if the gods themselves did see her then
When she saw Pyrrhus make malicious sport
In mincing with his sword her husband’s limbs,
The instant burst of clamor that she made
(Unless things mortal move them not at all)
Would have made milch the burning eyes of heaven
And passion in the gods.
POLONIUS  Look whe’er he has not turned his color and
has tears in ’s eyes. Prithee, no more.
HAMLET  ’Tis well. I’ll have thee speak out the rest of
this soon.—Good my lord, will you see the players
well bestowed? Do you hear, let them be well used,
for they are the abstract and brief chronicles of the
time. After your death you were better have a bad
epitaph than their ill report while you live.
POLONIUS  My lord, I will use them according to their
desert.
HAMLET  God’s bodykins, man, much better! Use every
man after his desert and who shall ’scape
whipping? Use them after your own honor and
dignity. The less they deserve, the more merit is in
your bounty. Take them in.
POLONIUS  Come, sirs.
HAMLET  Follow him, friends. We’ll hear a play
tomorrow. As Polonius and Players exit, Hamlet speaks to
the First Player. Dost thou hear me, old friend? Can
you play “The Murder of Gonzago”?
FIRST PLAYER  Ay, my lord.
HAMLET  We’ll ha ’t tomorrow night. You could, for a
need, study a speech of some dozen or sixteen
lines, which I would set down and insert in ’t,
could you not?
FIRST PLAYER  Ay, my lord.
HAMLET  Very well. Follow that lord—and look you
mock him not. First Player exits. My good friends,
I’ll leave you till night. You are welcome to Elsinore.
ROSENCRANTZ  Good my lord.
HAMLET
Ay, so, good-bye to you.
Rosencrantz and Guildenstern exit.
Now I am alone.
O, what a rogue and peasant slave am I!
Is it not monstrous that this player here,
But in a fiction, in a dream of passion,
Could force his soul so to his own conceit
That from her working all his visage wanned,
Tears in his eyes, distraction in his aspect,
A broken voice, and his whole function suiting
With forms to his conceit—and all for nothing!
For Hecuba!
What’s Hecuba to him, or he to Hecuba,
That he should weep for her? What would he do
Had he the motive and the cue for passion
That I have? He would drown the stage with tears
And cleave the general ear with horrid speech,
Make mad the guilty and appall the free,
Confound the ignorant and amaze indeed
The very faculties of eyes and ears. Yet I,
A dull and muddy-mettled rascal, peak
Like John-a-dreams, unpregnant of my cause,
And can say nothing—no, not for a king
Upon whose property and most dear life
A damned defeat was made. Am I a coward?
Who calls me “villain”? breaks my pate across?
Plucks off my beard and blows it in my face?
Tweaks me by the nose? gives me the lie i’ th’ throat
As deep as to the lungs? Who does me this?
Ha! ’Swounds, I should take it! For it cannot be
But I am pigeon-livered and lack gall
To make oppression bitter, or ere this
I should have fatted all the region kites
With this slave’s offal. Bloody, bawdy villain!
Remorseless, treacherous, lecherous, kindless
villain!
O vengeance!
Why, what an ass am I! This is most brave,
That I, the son of a dear father murdered,
Prompted to my revenge by heaven and hell,
Must, like a whore, unpack my heart with words
And fall a-cursing like a very drab,
A stallion! Fie upon ’t! Foh!
About, my brains!—Hum, I have heard
That guilty creatures sitting at a play
Have, by the very cunning of the scene,
Been struck so to the soul that presently
They have proclaimed their malefactions;
For murder, though it have no tongue, will speak
With most miraculous organ. I’ll have these players
Play something like the murder of my father
Before mine uncle. I’ll observe his looks;
I’ll tent him to the quick. If he do blench,
I know my course. The spirit that I have seen
May be a devil, and the devil hath power
T’ assume a pleasing shape; yea, and perhaps,
Out of my weakness and my melancholy,
As he is very potent with such spirits,
Abuses me to damn me. I’ll have grounds
More relative than this. The play’s the thing
Wherein I’ll catch the conscience of the King.
He exits.
 
 
 

 
 
ACT 3
 
Scene 1
Enter King, Queen, Polonius, Ophelia, Rosencrantz,
Guildenstern, and Lords.
 
KING
And can you by no drift of conference
Get from him why he puts on this confusion,
Grating so harshly all his days of quiet
With turbulent and dangerous lunacy?
ROSENCRANTZ
He does confess he feels himself distracted,
But from what cause he will by no means speak.
GUILDENSTERN
Nor do we find him forward to be sounded,
But with a crafty madness keeps aloof
When we would bring him on to some confession
Of his true state.
QUEEN  Did he receive you well?
ROSENCRANTZ  Most like a gentleman.
GUILDENSTERN
But with much forcing of his disposition.
ROSENCRANTZ
Niggard of question, but of our demands
Most free in his reply.
QUEEN  Did you assay him to any pastime?
ROSENCRANTZ
Madam, it so fell out that certain players
We o’erraught on the way. Of these we told him,
And there did seem in him a kind of joy
To hear of it. They are here about the court,
And, as I think, they have already order
This night to play before him.
POLONIUS  ’Tis most true,
And he beseeched me to entreat your Majesties
To hear and see the matter.
KING
With all my heart, and it doth much content me
To hear him so inclined.
Good gentlemen, give him a further edge
And drive his purpose into these delights.
ROSENCRANTZ
We shall, my lord.                            	
Rosencrantz and Guildenstern
and Lords exit.
KING  Sweet Gertrude, leave us too,
For we have closely sent for Hamlet hither,
That he, as ’twere by accident, may here
Affront Ophelia.
Her father and myself, lawful espials,
Will so bestow ourselves that, seeing unseen,
We may of their encounter frankly judge
And gather by him, as he is behaved,
If ’t be th’ affliction of his love or no
That thus he suffers for.
QUEEN  I shall obey you.
And for your part, Ophelia, I do wish
That your good beauties be the happy cause
Of Hamlet’s wildness. So shall I hope your virtues
Will bring him to his wonted way again,
To both your honors.
OPHELIA  Madam, I wish it may.
Queen exits.
POLONIUS
Ophelia, walk you here.—Gracious, so please you,
We will bestow ourselves. To Ophelia. Read on this
book,
That show of such an exercise may color
Your loneliness.—We are oft to blame in this
(’Tis too much proved), that with devotion’s visage
And pious action we do sugar o’er
The devil himself.
KING, aside  O, ’tis too true!
How smart a lash that speech doth give my
conscience.
The harlot’s cheek beautied with plast’ring art
Is not more ugly to the thing that helps it
Than is my deed to my most painted word.
O heavy burden!
POLONIUS
I hear him coming. Let’s withdraw, my lord.
They withdraw.
 
Enter Hamlet.
 
HAMLET
To be or not to be—that is the question:
Whether ’tis nobler in the mind to suffer
The slings and arrows of outrageous fortune,
Or to take arms against a sea of troubles
And, by opposing, end them. To die, to sleep—
No more—and by a sleep to say we end
The heartache and the thousand natural shocks
That flesh is heir to—’tis a consummation
Devoutly to be wished. To die, to sleep—
To sleep, perchance to dream. Ay, there’s the rub,
For in that sleep of death what dreams may come,
When we have shuffled off this mortal coil,
Must give us pause. There’s the respect
That makes calamity of so long life.
For who would bear the whips and scorns of time,
Th’ oppressor’s wrong, the proud man’s contumely,
The pangs of despised love, the law’s delay,
The insolence of office, and the spurns
That patient merit of th’ unworthy takes,
When he himself might his quietus make
With a bare bodkin? Who would fardels bear,
To grunt and sweat under a weary life,
But that the dread of something after death,
The undiscovered country from whose bourn
No traveler returns, puzzles the will
And makes us rather bear those ills we have
Than fly to others that we know not of?
Thus conscience does make cowards of us all,
And thus the native hue of resolution
Is sicklied o’er with the pale cast of thought,
And enterprises of great pitch and moment
With this regard their currents turn awry
And lose the name of action.—Soft you now,
The fair Ophelia.—Nymph, in thy orisons
Be all my sins remembered.
OPHELIA  Good my lord,
How does your Honor for this many a day?
HAMLET  I humbly thank you, well.
OPHELIA
My lord, I have remembrances of yours
That I have longèd long to redeliver.
I pray you now receive them.
HAMLET
No, not I. I never gave you aught.
OPHELIA
My honored lord, you know right well you did,
And with them words of so sweet breath composed
As made the things more rich. Their perfume
lost,
Take these again, for to the noble mind
Rich gifts wax poor when givers prove unkind.
There, my lord.
HAMLET  Ha, ha, are you honest?
OPHELIA  My lord?
HAMLET  Are you fair?
OPHELIA  What means your Lordship?
HAMLET  That if you be honest and fair, your honesty
should admit no discourse to your beauty.
OPHELIA  Could beauty, my lord, have better commerce
than with honesty?
HAMLET  Ay, truly, for the power of beauty will sooner
transform honesty from what it is to a bawd than
the force of honesty can translate beauty into his
likeness. This was sometime a paradox, but now
the time gives it proof. I did love you once.
OPHELIA  Indeed, my lord, you made me believe so.
HAMLET  You should not have believed me, for virtue
cannot so inoculate our old stock but we shall
relish of it. I loved you not.
OPHELIA  I was the more deceived.
HAMLET  Get thee to a nunnery. Why wouldst thou be
a breeder of sinners? I am myself indifferent honest,
but yet I could accuse me of such things that it
were better my mother had not borne me: I am
very proud, revengeful, ambitious, with more offenses
at my beck than I have thoughts to put them
in, imagination to give them shape, or time to act
them in. What should such fellows as I do crawling
between earth and heaven? We are arrant knaves
all; believe none of us. Go thy ways to a nunnery.
Where’s your father?
OPHELIA  At home, my lord.
HAMLET  Let the doors be shut upon him that he may
play the fool nowhere but in ’s own house. Farewell.
OPHELIA  O, help him, you sweet heavens!
HAMLET  If thou dost marry, I’ll give thee this plague
for thy dowry: be thou as chaste as ice, as pure as
snow, thou shalt not escape calumny. Get thee to a
nunnery, farewell. Or if thou wilt needs marry,
marry a fool, for wise men know well enough what
monsters you make of them. To a nunnery, go, and
quickly too. Farewell.
OPHELIA  Heavenly powers, restore him!
HAMLET  I have heard of your paintings too, well
enough. God hath given you one face, and you
make yourselves another. You jig and amble, and
you lisp; you nickname God’s creatures and make
your wantonness your ignorance. Go to, I’ll no
more on ’t. It hath made me mad. I say we will have
no more marriage. Those that are married already,
all but one, shall live. The rest shall keep as they are.
To a nunnery, go.                                                               	
He exits.
OPHELIA
O, what a noble mind is here o’erthrown!
The courtier’s, soldier’s, scholar’s, eye, tongue,
sword,
Th’ expectancy and rose of the fair state,
The glass of fashion and the mold of form,
Th’ observed of all observers, quite, quite down!
And I, of ladies most deject and wretched,
That sucked the honey of his musicked vows,
Now see that noble and most sovereign reason,
Like sweet bells jangled, out of time and harsh;
That unmatched form and stature of blown youth
Blasted with ecstasy. O, woe is me
T’ have seen what I have seen, see what I see!
KING, advancing with Polonius
Love? His affections do not that way tend;
Nor what he spake, though it lacked form a little,
Was not like madness. There’s something in his soul
O’er which his melancholy sits on brood,
And I do doubt the hatch and the disclose
Will be some danger; which for to prevent,
I have in quick determination
Thus set it down: he shall with speed to England
For the demand of our neglected tribute.
Haply the seas, and countries different,
With variable objects, shall expel
This something-settled matter in his heart,
Whereon his brains still beating puts him thus
From fashion of himself. What think you on ’t?
POLONIUS
It shall do well. But yet do I believe
The origin and commencement of his grief
Sprung from neglected love.—How now, Ophelia?
You need not tell us what Lord Hamlet said;
We heard it all.—My lord, do as you please,
But, if you hold it fit, after the play
Let his queen-mother all alone entreat him
To show his grief. Let her be round with him;
And I’ll be placed, so please you, in the ear
Of all their conference. If she find him not,
To England send him, or confine him where
Your wisdom best shall think.
KING  It shall be so.
Madness in great ones must not unwatched go.
They exit.
 
Scene 2
Enter Hamlet and three of the Players.
 
HAMLET  Speak the speech, I pray you, as I pronounced
it to you, trippingly on the tongue; but if you mouth
it, as many of our players do, I had as lief the
town-crier spoke my lines. Nor do not saw the air
too much with your hand, thus, but use all gently;
for in the very torrent, tempest, and, as I may say,
whirlwind of your passion, you must acquire and
beget a temperance that may give it smoothness. O,
it offends me to the soul to hear a robustious,
periwig-pated fellow tear a passion to tatters, to very
rags, to split the ears of the groundlings, who for the
most part are capable of nothing but inexplicable
dumb shows and noise. I would have such a fellow
whipped for o’erdoing Termagant. It out-Herods
Herod. Pray you, avoid it.
PLAYER  I warrant your Honor.
HAMLET  Be not too tame neither, but let your own
discretion be your tutor. Suit the action to the
word, the word to the action, with this special
observance, that you o’erstep not the modesty of
nature. For anything so o’erdone is from the purpose
of playing, whose end, both at the first and
now, was and is to hold, as ’twere, the mirror up to
nature, to show virtue her own feature, scorn her
own image, and the very age and body of the time
his form and pressure. Now this overdone or come
tardy off, though it makes the unskillful laugh,
cannot but make the judicious grieve, the censure
of the which one must in your allowance o’erweigh
a whole theater of others. O, there be players that I
have seen play and heard others praise (and that
highly), not to speak it profanely, that, neither
having th’ accent of Christians nor the gait of
Christian, pagan, nor man, have so strutted and
bellowed that I have thought some of nature’s
journeymen had made men, and not made them
well, they imitated humanity so abominably.
PLAYER  I hope we have reformed that indifferently
with us, sir.
HAMLET  O, reform it altogether. And let those that play
your clowns speak no more than is set down for
them, for there be of them that will themselves
laugh, to set on some quantity of barren spectators
to laugh too, though in the meantime some necessary
question of the play be then to be considered.
That’s villainous and shows a most pitiful ambition
in the fool that uses it. Go make you ready.
Players exit.
 
Enter Polonius, Guildenstern, and Rosencrantz.
 
How now, my lord, will the King hear this piece of
work?
POLONIUS  And the Queen too, and that presently.
HAMLET  Bid the players make haste.                        	
Polonius exits.
Will you two help to hasten them?
ROSENCRANTZ  Ay, my lord.                                            	
They exit.
HAMLET  What ho, Horatio!
 
Enter Horatio.
 
HORATIO  Here, sweet lord, at your service.
HAMLET
Horatio, thou art e’en as just a man
As e’er my conversation coped withal.
HORATIO
O, my dear lord—
HAMLET  Nay, do not think I flatter,
For what advancement may I hope from thee
That no revenue hast but thy good spirits
To feed and clothe thee? Why should the poor be
flattered?
No, let the candied tongue lick absurd pomp
And crook the pregnant hinges of the knee
Where thrift may follow fawning. Dost thou hear?
Since my dear soul was mistress of her choice
And could of men distinguish, her election
Hath sealed thee for herself. For thou hast been
As one in suffering all that suffers nothing,
A man that Fortune’s buffets and rewards
Hast ta’en with equal thanks; and blessed are those
Whose blood and judgment are so well
commeddled
That they are not a pipe for Fortune’s finger
To sound what stop she please. Give me that man
That is not passion’s slave, and I will wear him
In my heart’s core, ay, in my heart of heart,
As I do thee.—Something too much of this.—
There is a play tonight before the King.
One scene of it comes near the circumstance
Which I have told thee of my father’s death.
I prithee, when thou seest that act afoot,
Even with the very comment of thy soul
Observe my uncle. If his occulted guilt
Do not itself unkennel in one speech,
It is a damnèd ghost that we have seen,
And my imaginations are as foul
As Vulcan’s stithy. Give him heedful note,
For I mine eyes will rivet to his face,
And, after, we will both our judgments join
In censure of his seeming.
HORATIO  Well, my lord.
If he steal aught the whilst this play is playing
And ’scape detecting, I will pay the theft.
Sound a flourish.
HAMLET  They are coming to the play. I must be idle.
Get you a place.
 
Enter Trumpets and Kettle Drums. Enter King, Queen,
Polonius, Ophelia, Rosencrantz, Guildenstern, and other
Lords attendant with the King’s guard carrying
torches.
 
KING  How fares our cousin Hamlet?
HAMLET  Excellent, i’ faith, of the chameleon’s dish. I
eat the air, promise-crammed. You cannot feed
capons so.
KING  I have nothing with this answer, Hamlet. These
words are not mine.
HAMLET  No, nor mine now. To Polonius. My lord, you
played once i’ th’ university, you say?
POLONIUS  That did I, my lord, and was accounted a
good actor.
HAMLET  What did you enact?
POLONIUS  I did enact Julius Caesar. I was killed i’ th’
Capitol. Brutus killed me.
HAMLET  It was a brute part of him to kill so capital a
calf there.—Be the players ready?
ROSENCRANTZ  Ay, my lord. They stay upon your
patience.
QUEEN  Come hither, my dear Hamlet, sit by me.
HAMLET  No, good mother. Here’s metal more
attractive.                               	
Hamlet takes a place near Ophelia.
POLONIUS, to the King  Oh, ho! Do you mark that?
HAMLET  Lady, shall I lie in your lap?
OPHELIA  No, my lord.
HAMLET  I mean, my head upon your lap?
OPHELIA  Ay, my lord.
HAMLET  Do you think I meant country matters?
OPHELIA  I think nothing, my lord.
HAMLET  That’s a fair thought to lie between maids’
legs.
OPHELIA  What is, my lord?
HAMLET  Nothing.
OPHELIA  You are merry, my lord.
HAMLET  Who, I?
OPHELIA  Ay, my lord.
HAMLET  O God, your only jig-maker. What should a
man do but be merry? For look you how cheerfully
my mother looks, and my father died within ’s two
hours.
OPHELIA  Nay, ’tis twice two months, my lord.
HAMLET  So long? Nay, then, let the devil wear black,
for I’ll have a suit of sables. O heavens, die two
months ago, and not forgotten yet? Then there’s
hope a great man’s memory may outlive his life half
a year. But, by ’r Lady, he must build churches, then,
or else shall he suffer not thinking on, with the
hobby-horse, whose epitaph is “For oh, for oh, the
hobby-horse is forgot.”
The trumpets sounds. Dumb show follows.
 
Enter a King and a Queen, very lovingly, the Queen
embracing him and he her. She kneels and makes show of
protestation unto him. He takes her up and declines his
head upon her neck. He lies him down upon a bank of
flowers. She, seeing him asleep, leaves him. Anon
comes in another man, takes off his crown, kisses it, pours
poison in the sleeper’s ears, and leaves him. The Queen
returns, finds the King dead, makes passionate action. The
poisoner with some three or four come in again, seem to
condole with her. The dead body is carried away. The
poisoner woos the Queen with gifts. She seems harsh
awhile but in the end accepts his love.
Players exit.
OPHELIA  What means this, my lord?
HAMLET  Marry, this is miching mallecho. It means
mischief.
OPHELIA  Belike this show imports the argument of the
play.
 
Enter Prologue.
 
HAMLET  We shall know by this fellow. The players
cannot keep counsel; they’ll tell all.
OPHELIA  Will he tell us what this show meant?
HAMLET  Ay, or any show that you will show him. Be
not you ashamed to show, he’ll not shame to tell you
what it means.
OPHELIA  You are naught, you are naught. I’ll mark the
play.
PROLOGUE
       	For us and for our tragedy,
       	Here stooping to your clemency,
       	We beg your hearing patiently.                                 	
He exits.
HAMLET  Is this a prologue or the posy of a ring?
OPHELIA  ’Tis brief, my lord.
HAMLET  As woman’s love.
 
Enter the Player King and Queen.
 
PLAYER KING
Full thirty times hath Phoebus’ cart gone round
Neptune’s salt wash and Tellus’ orbèd ground,
And thirty dozen moons with borrowed sheen
About the world have times twelve thirties been
Since love our hearts and Hymen did our hands
Unite commutual in most sacred bands.
PLAYER QUEEN
So many journeys may the sun and moon
Make us again count o’er ere love be done!
But woe is me! You are so sick of late,
So far from cheer and from your former state,
That I distrust you. Yet, though I distrust,
Discomfort you, my lord, it nothing must.
For women fear too much, even as they love,
And women’s fear and love hold quantity,
In neither aught, or in extremity.
Now what my love is, proof hath made you know,
And, as my love is sized, my fear is so:
Where love is great, the littlest doubts are fear;
Where little fears grow great, great love grows there.
PLAYER KING
Faith, I must leave thee, love, and shortly too.
My operant powers their functions leave to do.
And thou shalt live in this fair world behind,
Honored, beloved; and haply one as kind
For husband shalt thou—
PLAYER QUEEN  O, confound the rest!
Such love must needs be treason in my breast.
In second husband let me be accurst.
None wed the second but who killed the first.
HAMLET  That’s wormwood!
PLAYER QUEEN
The instances that second marriage move
Are base respects of thrift, but none of love.
A second time I kill my husband dead
When second husband kisses me in bed.
PLAYER KING
I do believe you think what now you speak,
But what we do determine oft we break.
Purpose is but the slave to memory,
Of violent birth, but poor validity,
Which now, the fruit unripe, sticks on the tree
But fall unshaken when they mellow be.
Most necessary ’tis that we forget
To pay ourselves what to ourselves is debt.
What to ourselves in passion we propose,
The passion ending, doth the purpose lose.
The violence of either grief or joy
Their own enactures with themselves destroy.
Where joy most revels, grief doth most lament;
Grief joys, joy grieves, on slender accident.
This world is not for aye, nor ’tis not strange
That even our loves should with our fortunes change;
For ’tis a question left us yet to prove
Whether love lead fortune or else fortune love.
The great man down, you mark his favorite flies;
The poor, advanced, makes friends of enemies.
And hitherto doth love on fortune tend,
For who not needs shall never lack a friend,
And who in want a hollow friend doth try
Directly seasons him his enemy.
But, orderly to end where I begun:
Our wills and fates do so contrary run
That our devices still are overthrown;
Our thoughts are ours, their ends none of our own.
So think thou wilt no second husband wed,
But die thy thoughts when thy first lord is dead.
PLAYER QUEEN
Nor Earth to me give food, nor heaven light,
Sport and repose lock from me day and night,
To desperation turn my trust and hope,
An anchor’s cheer in prison be my scope.
Each opposite that blanks the face of joy
Meet what I would have well and it destroy.
Both here and hence pursue me lasting strife,
If, once a widow, ever I be wife.
HAMLET  If she should break it now!
PLAYER KING
’Tis deeply sworn. Sweet, leave me here awhile.
My spirits grow dull, and fain I would beguile
The tedious day with sleep.                                                     	
Sleeps.
PLAYER QUEEN  Sleep rock thy brain,
And never come mischance between us twain.
Player Queen exits.
HAMLET  Madam, how like you this play?
QUEEN  The lady doth protest too much, methinks.
HAMLET  O, but she’ll keep her word.
KING  Have you heard the argument? Is there no
offense in ’t?
HAMLET  No, no, they do but jest, poison in jest. No
offense i’ th’ world.
KING  What do you call the play?
HAMLET  “The Mousetrap.” Marry, how? Tropically.
This play is the image of a murder done in Vienna.
Gonzago is the duke’s name, his wife Baptista. You
shall see anon. ’Tis a knavish piece of work, but
what of that? Your Majesty and we that have free
souls, it touches us not. Let the galled jade wince;
our withers are unwrung.
 
Enter Lucianus.
 
This is one Lucianus, nephew to the king.
OPHELIA  You are as good as a chorus, my lord.
HAMLET  I could interpret between you and your love,
if I could see the puppets dallying.
OPHELIA  You are keen, my lord, you are keen.
HAMLET  It would cost you a groaning to take off mine
edge.
OPHELIA  Still better and worse.
HAMLET  So you mis-take your husbands.—Begin,
murderer. Pox, leave thy damnable faces and
begin. Come, the croaking raven doth bellow for
revenge.
LUCIANUS
Thoughts black, hands apt, drugs fit, and time
agreeing,
Confederate season, else no creature seeing,
Thou mixture rank, of midnight weeds collected,
With Hecate’s ban thrice blasted, thrice infected,
Thy natural magic and dire property
On wholesome life usurp immediately.
Pours the poison in his ears.
HAMLET  He poisons him i’ th’ garden for his estate. His
name’s Gonzago. The story is extant and written in
very choice Italian. You shall see anon how the
murderer gets the love of Gonzago’s wife.
Claudius rises.
OPHELIA  The King rises.
HAMLET  What, frighted with false fire?
QUEEN  How fares my lord?
POLONIUS  Give o’er the play.
KING  Give me some light. Away!
POLONIUS  Lights, lights, lights!
All but Hamlet and Horatio exit.
HAMLET
       	Why, let the strucken deer go weep,
       	   The hart ungallèd play.
       	For some must watch, while some must sleep:
       	   Thus runs the world away.
Would not this, sir, and a forest of feathers (if the
rest of my fortunes turn Turk with me) with two
Provincial roses on my razed shoes, get me a
fellowship in a cry of players?
HORATIO  Half a share.
HAMLET  A whole one, I.
       	For thou dost know, O Damon dear,
       	   This realm dismantled was
       	Of Jove himself, and now reigns here
       	   A very very—pajock.
HORATIO  You might have rhymed.
HAMLET  O good Horatio, I’ll take the ghost’s word for
a thousand pound. Didst perceive?
HORATIO  Very well, my lord.
HAMLET  Upon the talk of the poisoning?
HORATIO  I did very well note him.
HAMLET  Ah ha! Come, some music! Come, the
recorders!
       	For if the King like not the comedy,
       	Why, then, belike he likes it not, perdy.
Come, some music!
 
Enter Rosencrantz and Guildenstern.
 
GUILDENSTERN  Good my lord, vouchsafe me a word
with you.
HAMLET  Sir, a whole history.
GUILDENSTERN  The King, sir—
HAMLET  Ay, sir, what of him?
GUILDENSTERN  Is in his retirement marvelous
distempered.
HAMLET  With drink, sir?
GUILDENSTERN  No, my lord, with choler.
HAMLET  Your wisdom should show itself more richer
to signify this to the doctor, for for me to put him to
his purgation would perhaps plunge him into more
choler.
GUILDENSTERN  Good my lord, put your discourse into
some frame and start not so wildly from my
affair.
HAMLET  I am tame, sir. Pronounce.
GUILDENSTERN  The Queen your mother, in most great
affliction of spirit, hath sent me to you.
HAMLET  You are welcome.
GUILDENSTERN  Nay, good my lord, this courtesy is not
of the right breed. If it shall please you to make me
a wholesome answer, I will do your mother’s
commandment. If not, your pardon and my return
shall be the end of my business.
HAMLET  Sir, I cannot.
ROSENCRANTZ  What, my lord?
HAMLET  Make you a wholesome answer. My wit’s
diseased. But, sir, such answer as I can make, you
shall command—or, rather, as you say, my mother.
Therefore no more but to the matter. My mother,
you say—
ROSENCRANTZ  Then thus she says: your behavior hath
struck her into amazement and admiration.
HAMLET  O wonderful son that can so ’stonish a mother!
But is there no sequel at the heels of this
mother’s admiration? Impart.
ROSENCRANTZ  She desires to speak with you in her
closet ere you go to bed.
HAMLET  We shall obey, were she ten times our mother.
Have you any further trade with us?
ROSENCRANTZ  My lord, you once did love me.
HAMLET  And do still, by these pickers and stealers.
ROSENCRANTZ  Good my lord, what is your cause of
distemper? You do surely bar the door upon your
own liberty if you deny your griefs to your friend.
HAMLET  Sir, I lack advancement.
ROSENCRANTZ  How can that be, when you have the
voice of the King himself for your succession in
Denmark?
HAMLET  Ay, sir, but “While the grass grows”—the
proverb is something musty.
 
Enter the Players with recorders.
 
O, the recorders! Let me see one. He takes a
recorder and turns to Guildenstern. To withdraw
with you: why do you go about to recover the wind
of me, as if you would drive me into a toil?
GUILDENSTERN  O, my lord, if my duty be too bold, my
love is too unmannerly.
HAMLET  I do not well understand that. Will you play
upon this pipe?
GUILDENSTERN  My lord, I cannot.
HAMLET  I pray you.
GUILDENSTERN  Believe me, I cannot.
HAMLET  I do beseech you.
GUILDENSTERN  I know no touch of it, my lord.
HAMLET  It is as easy as lying. Govern these ventages
with your fingers and thumb, give it breath with
your mouth, and it will discourse most eloquent
music. Look you, these are the stops.
GUILDENSTERN  But these cannot I command to any
utt’rance of harmony. I have not the skill.
HAMLET  Why, look you now, how unworthy a thing
you make of me! You would play upon me, you
would seem to know my stops, you would pluck
out the heart of my mystery, you would sound me
from my lowest note to the top of my compass;
and there is much music, excellent voice, in this
little organ, yet cannot you make it speak. ’Sblood,
do you think I am easier to be played on than a pipe?
Call me what instrument you will, though you can
fret me, you cannot play upon me.
 
Enter Polonius.
 
God bless you, sir.
POLONIUS  My lord, the Queen would speak with you,
and presently.
HAMLET  Do you see yonder cloud that’s almost in
shape of a camel?
POLONIUS  By th’ Mass, and ’tis like a camel indeed.
HAMLET  Methinks it is like a weasel.
POLONIUS  It is backed like a weasel.
HAMLET  Or like a whale.
POLONIUS  Very like a whale.
HAMLET  Then I will come to my mother by and by.
Aside. They fool me to the top of my bent.—I will
come by and by.
POLONIUS  I will say so.
HAMLET  “By and by” is easily said. Leave me,
friends.
All but Hamlet exit.
’Tis now the very witching time of night,
When churchyards yawn and hell itself breathes
out
Contagion to this world. Now could I drink hot
blood
And do such bitter business as the day
Would quake to look on. Soft, now to my mother.
O heart, lose not thy nature; let not ever
The soul of Nero enter this firm bosom.
Let me be cruel, not unnatural.
I will speak daggers to her, but use none.
My tongue and soul in this be hypocrites:
How in my words somever she be shent,
To give them seals never, my soul, consent.
He exits.
 
Scene 3
Enter King, Rosencrantz, and Guildenstern.
 
KING
I like him not, nor stands it safe with us
To let his madness range. Therefore prepare you.
I your commission will forthwith dispatch,
And he to England shall along with you.
The terms of our estate may not endure
Hazard so near ’s as doth hourly grow
Out of his brows.
GUILDENSTERN  We will ourselves provide.
Most holy and religious fear it is
To keep those many many bodies safe
That live and feed upon your Majesty.
ROSENCRANTZ
The single and peculiar life is bound
With all the strength and armor of the mind
To keep itself from noyance, but much more
That spirit upon whose weal depends and rests
The lives of many. The cess of majesty
Dies not alone, but like a gulf doth draw
What’s near it with it; or it is a massy wheel
Fixed on the summit of the highest mount,
To whose huge spokes ten thousand lesser things
Are mortised and adjoined, which, when it falls,
Each small annexment, petty consequence,
Attends the boist’rous ruin. Never alone
Did the king sigh, but with a general groan.
KING
Arm you, I pray you, to this speedy voyage,
For we will fetters put about this fear,
Which now goes too free-footed.
ROSENCRANTZ  We will haste us.
Rosencrantz and Guildenstern exit.
 
Enter Polonius.
 
POLONIUS
My lord, he’s going to his mother’s closet.
Behind the arras I’ll convey myself
To hear the process. I’ll warrant she’ll tax him
home;
And, as you said (and wisely was it said),
’Tis meet that some more audience than a mother,
Since nature makes them partial, should o’erhear
The speech of vantage. Fare you well, my liege.
I’ll call upon you ere you go to bed
And tell you what I know.
KING  Thanks, dear my lord.
Polonius exits.
O, my offense is rank, it smells to heaven;
It hath the primal eldest curse upon ’t,
A brother’s murder. Pray can I not,
Though inclination be as sharp as will.
My stronger guilt defeats my strong intent,
And, like a man to double business bound,
I stand in pause where I shall first begin
And both neglect. What if this cursèd hand
Were thicker than itself with brother’s blood?
Is there not rain enough in the sweet heavens
To wash it white as snow? Whereto serves mercy
But to confront the visage of offense?
And what’s in prayer but this twofold force,
To be forestallèd ere we come to fall,
Or pardoned being down? Then I’ll look up.
My fault is past. But, O, what form of prayer
Can serve my turn? “Forgive me my foul murder”?
That cannot be, since I am still possessed
Of those effects for which I did the murder:
My crown, mine own ambition, and my queen.
May one be pardoned and retain th’ offense?
In the corrupted currents of this world,
Offense’s gilded hand may shove by justice,
And oft ’tis seen the wicked prize itself
Buys out the law. But ’tis not so above:
There is no shuffling; there the action lies
In his true nature, and we ourselves compelled,
Even to the teeth and forehead of our faults,
To give in evidence. What then? What rests?
Try what repentance can. What can it not?
Yet what can it, when one cannot repent?
O wretched state! O bosom black as death!
O limèd soul, that, struggling to be free,
Art more engaged! Help, angels! Make assay.
Bow, stubborn knees, and heart with strings of steel
Be soft as sinews of the newborn babe.
All may be well.                                                                 	
He kneels.
 
Enter Hamlet.
 
HAMLET
Now might I do it pat, now he is a-praying,
And now I’ll do ’t.                                            	
He draws his sword.
And so he goes to heaven,
And so am I revenged. That would be scanned:
A villain kills my father, and for that,
I, his sole son, do this same villain send
To heaven.
Why, this is hire and salary, not revenge.
He took my father grossly, full of bread,
With all his crimes broad blown, as flush as May;
And how his audit stands who knows save heaven.
But in our circumstance and course of thought
’Tis heavy with him. And am I then revenged
To take him in the purging of his soul,
When he is fit and seasoned for his passage?
No.
Up sword, and know thou a more horrid hent.
He sheathes his sword.
When he is drunk asleep, or in his rage,
Or in th’ incestuous pleasure of his bed,
At game, a-swearing, or about some act
That has no relish of salvation in ’t—
Then trip him, that his heels may kick at heaven,
And that his soul may be as damned and black
As hell, whereto it goes. My mother stays.
This physic but prolongs thy sickly days.
Hamlet exits.
KING, rising
My words fly up, my thoughts remain below;
Words without thoughts never to heaven go.
He exits.
 
Scene 4
Enter Queen and Polonius.
 
POLONIUS
He will come straight. Look you lay home to him.
Tell him his pranks have been too broad to bear
with
And that your Grace hath screened and stood
between
Much heat and him. I’ll silence me even here.
Pray you, be round with him.
HAMLET, within  Mother, mother, mother!
QUEEN  I’ll warrant you. Fear me not. Withdraw,
I hear him coming.
Polonius hides behind the arras.
 
Enter Hamlet.
 
HAMLET  Now, mother, what’s the matter?
QUEEN
Hamlet, thou hast thy father much offended.
HAMLET
Mother, you have my father much offended.
QUEEN
Come, come, you answer with an idle tongue.
HAMLET
Go, go, you question with a wicked tongue.
QUEEN
Why, how now, Hamlet?
HAMLET  What’s the matter now?
QUEEN
Have you forgot me?
HAMLET  No, by the rood, not so.
You are the Queen, your husband’s brother’s wife,
And (would it were not so) you are my mother.
QUEEN
Nay, then I’ll set those to you that can speak.
HAMLET
Come, come, and sit you down; you shall not budge.
You go not till I set you up a glass
Where you may see the inmost part of you.
QUEEN
What wilt thou do? Thou wilt not murder me?
Help, ho!
POLONIUS, behind the arras  What ho! Help!
HAMLET
How now, a rat? Dead for a ducat, dead.
He kills Polonius by thrusting a rapier
through the arras.
POLONIUS, behind the arras
O, I am slain!
QUEEN  O me, what hast thou done?
HAMLET  Nay, I know not. Is it the King?
QUEEN
O, what a rash and bloody deed is this!
HAMLET
A bloody deed—almost as bad, good mother,
As kill a king and marry with his brother.
QUEEN
As kill a king?
HAMLET  Ay, lady, it was my word.
He pulls Polonius’ body from behind the arras.
Thou wretched, rash, intruding fool, farewell.
I took thee for thy better. Take thy fortune.
Thou find’st to be too busy is some danger.
To Queen. Leave wringing of your hands. Peace, sit
you down,
And let me wring your heart; for so I shall
If it be made of penetrable stuff,
If damnèd custom have not brazed it so
That it be proof and bulwark against sense.
QUEEN
What have I done, that thou dar’st wag thy tongue
In noise so rude against me?
HAMLET  Such an act
That blurs the grace and blush of modesty,
Calls virtue hypocrite, takes off the rose
From the fair forehead of an innocent love
And sets a blister there, makes marriage vows
As false as dicers’ oaths—O, such a deed
As from the body of contraction plucks
The very soul, and sweet religion makes
A rhapsody of words! Heaven’s face does glow
O’er this solidity and compound mass
With heated visage, as against the doom,
Is thought-sick at the act.
QUEEN  Ay me, what act
That roars so loud and thunders in the index?
HAMLET
Look here upon this picture and on this,
The counterfeit presentment of two brothers.
See what a grace was seated on this brow,
Hyperion’s curls, the front of Jove himself,
An eye like Mars’ to threaten and command,
A station like the herald Mercury
New-lighted on a heaven-kissing hill,
A combination and a form indeed
Where every god did seem to set his seal
To give the world assurance of a man.
This was your husband. Look you now what follows.
Here is your husband, like a mildewed ear
Blasting his wholesome brother. Have you eyes?
Could you on this fair mountain leave to feed
And batten on this moor? Ha! Have you eyes?
You cannot call it love, for at your age
The heyday in the blood is tame, it’s humble
And waits upon the judgment; and what judgment
Would step from this to this? Sense sure you have,
Else could you not have motion; but sure that sense
Is apoplexed; for madness would not err,
Nor sense to ecstasy was ne’er so thralled,
But it reserved some quantity of choice
To serve in such a difference. What devil was ’t
That thus hath cozened you at hoodman-blind?
Eyes without feeling, feeling without sight,
Ears without hands or eyes, smelling sans all,
Or but a sickly part of one true sense
Could not so mope. O shame, where is thy blush?
Rebellious hell,
If thou canst mutine in a matron’s bones,
To flaming youth let virtue be as wax
And melt in her own fire. Proclaim no shame
When the compulsive ardor gives the charge,
Since frost itself as actively doth burn,
And reason panders will.
QUEEN  O Hamlet, speak no more!
Thou turn’st my eyes into my very soul,
And there I see such black and grainèd spots
As will not leave their tinct.
HAMLET  Nay, but to live
In the rank sweat of an enseamèd bed,
Stewed in corruption, honeying and making love
Over the nasty sty!
QUEEN  O, speak to me no more!
These words like daggers enter in my ears.
No more, sweet Hamlet!
HAMLET  A murderer and a villain,
A slave that is not twentieth part the tithe
Of your precedent lord; a vice of kings,
A cutpurse of the empire and the rule,
That from a shelf the precious diadem stole
And put it in his pocket—
QUEEN  No more!
HAMLET  A king of shreds and patches—
 
Enter Ghost.
 
Save me and hover o’er me with your wings,
You heavenly guards!—What would your gracious
figure?
QUEEN  Alas, he’s mad.
HAMLET
Do you not come your tardy son to chide,
That, lapsed in time and passion, lets go by
Th’ important acting of your dread command?
O, say!
GHOST  Do not forget. This visitation
Is but to whet thy almost blunted purpose.
But look, amazement on thy mother sits.
O, step between her and her fighting soul.
Conceit in weakest bodies strongest works.
Speak to her, Hamlet.
HAMLET  How is it with you, lady?
QUEEN  Alas, how is ’t with you,
That you do bend your eye on vacancy
And with th’ incorporal air do hold discourse?
Forth at your eyes your spirits wildly peep,
And, as the sleeping soldiers in th’ alarm,
Your bedded hair, like life in excrements,
Start up and stand an end. O gentle son,
Upon the heat and flame of thy distemper
Sprinkle cool patience! Whereon do you look?
HAMLET
On him, on him! Look you how pale he glares.
His form and cause conjoined, preaching to stones,
Would make them capable. To the Ghost. Do not
look upon me,
Lest with this piteous action you convert
My stern effects. Then what I have to do
Will want true color—tears perchance for blood.
QUEEN  To whom do you speak this?
HAMLET  Do you see nothing there?
QUEEN
Nothing at all; yet all that is I see.
HAMLET  Nor did you nothing hear?
QUEEN  No, nothing but ourselves.
HAMLET
Why, look you there, look how it steals away!
My father, in his habit as he lived!
Look where he goes even now out at the portal!
Ghost exits.
QUEEN
This is the very coinage of your brain.
This bodiless creation ecstasy
Is very cunning in.
HAMLET  Ecstasy?
My pulse as yours doth temperately keep time
And makes as healthful music. It is not madness
That I have uttered. Bring me to the test,
And I the matter will reword, which madness
Would gambol from. Mother, for love of grace,
Lay not that flattering unction to your soul
That not your trespass but my madness speaks.
It will but skin and film the ulcerous place,
Whiles rank corruption, mining all within,
Infects unseen. Confess yourself to heaven,
Repent what’s past, avoid what is to come,
And do not spread the compost on the weeds
To make them ranker. Forgive me this my virtue,
For, in the fatness of these pursy times,
Virtue itself of vice must pardon beg,
Yea, curb and woo for leave to do him good.
QUEEN
O Hamlet, thou hast cleft my heart in twain!
HAMLET
O, throw away the worser part of it,
And live the purer with the other half!
Good night. But go not to my uncle’s bed.
Assume a virtue if you have it not.
That monster, custom, who all sense doth eat,
Of habits devil, is angel yet in this,
That to the use of actions fair and good
He likewise gives a frock or livery
That aptly is put on. Refrain tonight,
And that shall lend a kind of easiness
To the next abstinence, the next more easy;
For use almost can change the stamp of nature
And either … the devil or throw him out
With wondrous potency. Once more, good night,
And, when you are desirous to be blest,
I’ll blessing beg of you. For this same lord
Pointing to Polonius.
I do repent; but heaven hath pleased it so
To punish me with this and this with me,
That I must be their scourge and minister.
I will bestow him and will answer well
The death I gave him. So, again, good night.
I must be cruel only to be kind.
This bad begins, and worse remains behind.
One word more, good lady.
QUEEN  What shall I do?
HAMLET
Not this by no means that I bid you do:
Let the bloat king tempt you again to bed,
Pinch wanton on your cheek, call you his mouse,
And let him, for a pair of reechy kisses
Or paddling in your neck with his damned fingers,
Make you to ravel all this matter out
That I essentially am not in madness,
But mad in craft. ’Twere good you let him know,
For who that’s but a queen, fair, sober, wise,
Would from a paddock, from a bat, a gib,
Such dear concernings hide? Who would do so?
No, in despite of sense and secrecy,
Unpeg the basket on the house’s top,
Let the birds fly, and like the famous ape,
To try conclusions, in the basket creep
And break your own neck down.
QUEEN
Be thou assured, if words be made of breath
And breath of life, I have no life to breathe
What thou hast said to me.
HAMLET
I must to England, you know that.
QUEEN  Alack,
I had forgot! ’Tis so concluded on.
HAMLET
There’s letters sealed; and my two schoolfellows,
Whom I will trust as I will adders fanged,
They bear the mandate; they must sweep my way
And marshal me to knavery. Let it work,
For ’tis the sport to have the enginer
Hoist with his own petard; and ’t shall go hard
But I will delve one yard below their mines
And blow them at the moon. O, ’tis most sweet
When in one line two crafts directly meet.
This man shall set me packing.
I’ll lug the guts into the neighbor room.
Mother, good night indeed. This counselor
Is now most still, most secret, and most grave,
Who was in life a foolish prating knave.—
Come, sir, to draw toward an end with you.—
Good night, mother.
They exit, Hamlet tugging in Polonius.
 
 
 

 
 
ACT 4
 
Scene 1
Enter King and Queen, with Rosencrantz and
Guildenstern.
 
KING
There’s matter in these sighs; these profound heaves
You must translate; ’tis fit we understand them.
Where is your son?
QUEEN
Bestow this place on us a little while.
Rosencrantz and Guildenstern exit.
Ah, mine own lord, what have I seen tonight!
KING  What, Gertrude? How does Hamlet?
QUEEN
Mad as the sea and wind when both contend
Which is the mightier. In his lawless fit,
Behind the arras hearing something stir,
Whips out his rapier, cries “A rat, a rat,”
And in this brainish apprehension kills
The unseen good old man.
KING  O heavy deed!
It had been so with us, had we been there.
His liberty is full of threats to all—
To you yourself, to us, to everyone.
Alas, how shall this bloody deed be answered?
It will be laid to us, whose providence
Should have kept short, restrained, and out of haunt
This mad young man. But so much was our love,
We would not understand what was most fit,
But, like the owner of a foul disease,
To keep it from divulging, let it feed
Even on the pith of life. Where is he gone?
QUEEN
To draw apart the body he hath killed,
O’er whom his very madness, like some ore
Among a mineral of metals base,
Shows itself pure: he weeps for what is done.
KING  O Gertrude, come away!
The sun no sooner shall the mountains touch
But we will ship him hence; and this vile deed
We must with all our majesty and skill
Both countenance and excuse.—Ho, Guildenstern!
 
Enter Rosencrantz and Guildenstern.
 
Friends both, go join you with some further aid.
Hamlet in madness hath Polonius slain,
And from his mother’s closet hath he dragged him.
Go seek him out, speak fair, and bring the body
Into the chapel. I pray you, haste in this.
Rosencrantz and Guildenstern exit.
Come, Gertrude, we’ll call up our wisest friends
And let them know both what we mean to do
And what’s untimely done. …
Whose whisper o’er the world’s diameter,
As level as the cannon to his blank
Transports his poisoned shot, may miss our name
And hit the woundless air. O, come away!
My soul is full of discord and dismay.
They exit.
 
Scene 2
Enter Hamlet.
 
HAMLET  Safely stowed.
GENTLEMEN, within  Hamlet! Lord Hamlet!
HAMLET  But soft, what noise? Who calls on Hamlet?
O, here they come.
 
Enter Rosencrantz, Guildenstern, and others.
 
ROSENCRANTZ
What have you done, my lord, with the dead body?
HAMLET
Compounded it with dust, whereto ’tis kin.
ROSENCRANTZ
Tell us where ’tis, that we may take it thence
And bear it to the chapel.
HAMLET  Do not believe it.
ROSENCRANTZ  Believe what?
HAMLET  That I can keep your counsel and not mine
own. Besides, to be demanded of a sponge, what
replication should be made by the son of a king?
ROSENCRANTZ  Take you me for a sponge, my lord?
HAMLET  Ay, sir, that soaks up the King’s countenance,
his rewards, his authorities. But such officers do the
King best service in the end. He keeps them like an
ape an apple in the corner of his jaw, first mouthed,
to be last swallowed. When he needs what you have
gleaned, it is but squeezing you, and, sponge, you
shall be dry again.
ROSENCRANTZ  I understand you not, my lord.
HAMLET  I am glad of it. A knavish speech sleeps in a
foolish ear.
ROSENCRANTZ  My lord, you must tell us where the
body is and go with us to the King.
HAMLET  The body is with the King, but the King is not
with the body. The King is a thing—
GUILDENSTERN  A “thing,” my lord?
HAMLET  Of nothing. Bring me to him. Hide fox, and
all after!
They exit.
 
Scene 3
Enter King and two or three.
 
KING
I have sent to seek him and to find the body.
How dangerous is it that this man goes loose!
Yet must not we put the strong law on him.
He’s loved of the distracted multitude,
Who like not in their judgment, but their eyes;
And, where ’tis so, th’ offender’s scourge is weighed,
But never the offense. To bear all smooth and even,
This sudden sending him away must seem
Deliberate pause. Diseases desperate grown
By desperate appliance are relieved
Or not at all.
 
Enter Rosencrantz.
 
How now, what hath befallen?
ROSENCRANTZ
Where the dead body is bestowed, my lord,
We cannot get from him.
KING  But where is he?
ROSENCRANTZ
Without, my lord; guarded, to know your pleasure.
KING
Bring him before us.
ROSENCRANTZ  Ho! Bring in the lord.
 
They enter with Hamlet.
 
KING  Now, Hamlet, where’s Polonius?
HAMLET  At supper.
KING  At supper where?
HAMLET  Not where he eats, but where he is eaten. A
certain convocation of politic worms are e’en at
him. Your worm is your only emperor for diet. We
fat all creatures else to fat us, and we fat ourselves
for maggots. Your fat king and your lean beggar is
but variable service—two dishes but to one table.
That’s the end.
KING  Alas, alas!
HAMLET  A man may fish with the worm that hath eat
of a king and eat of the fish that hath fed of that
worm.
KING  What dost thou mean by this?
HAMLET  Nothing but to show you how a king may go a
progress through the guts of a beggar.
KING  Where is Polonius?
HAMLET  In heaven. Send thither to see. If your messenger
find him not there, seek him i’ th’ other
place yourself. But if, indeed, you find him not
within this month, you shall nose him as you go up
the stairs into the lobby.
KING, to Attendants.  Go, seek him there.
HAMLET  He will stay till you come.                        	
Attendants exit.
KING
Hamlet, this deed, for thine especial safety
(Which we do tender, as we dearly grieve
For that which thou hast done) must send thee
hence
With fiery quickness. Therefore prepare thyself.
The bark is ready, and the wind at help,
Th’ associates tend, and everything is bent
For England.
HAMLET  For England?
KING  Ay, Hamlet.
HAMLET  Good.
KING
So is it, if thou knew’st our purposes.
HAMLET
I see a cherub that sees them. But come, for
England.
Farewell, dear mother.
KING  Thy loving father, Hamlet.
HAMLET
My mother. Father and mother is man and wife,
Man and wife is one flesh, and so, my mother.—
Come, for England.                                                              	
He exits.
KING
Follow him at foot; tempt him with speed aboard.
Delay it not. I’ll have him hence tonight.
Away, for everything is sealed and done
That else leans on th’ affair. Pray you, make haste.
All but the King exit.
And England, if my love thou hold’st at aught
(As my great power thereof may give thee sense,
Since yet thy cicatrice looks raw and red
After the Danish sword, and thy free awe
Pays homage to us), thou mayst not coldly set
Our sovereign process, which imports at full,
By letters congruing to that effect,
The present death of Hamlet. Do it, England,
For like the hectic in my blood he rages,
And thou must cure me. Till I know ’tis done,
Howe’er my haps, my joys will ne’er begin.
He exits.
 
Scene 4
Enter Fortinbras with his army over the stage.
 
FORTINBRAS
Go, Captain, from me greet the Danish king.
Tell him that by his license Fortinbras
Craves the conveyance of a promised march
Over his kingdom. You know the rendezvous.
If that his Majesty would aught with us,
We shall express our duty in his eye;
And let him know so.
CAPTAIN  I will do ’t, my lord.
FORTINBRAS  Go softly on.                        	
All but the Captain exit.
 
Enter Hamlet, Rosencrantz, Guildenstern, and others.
 
HAMLET  Good sir, whose powers are these?
CAPTAIN  They are of Norway, sir.
HAMLET  How purposed, sir, I pray you?
CAPTAIN  Against some part of Poland.
HAMLET  Who commands them, sir?
CAPTAIN
The nephew to old Norway, Fortinbras.
HAMLET
Goes it against the main of Poland, sir,
Or for some frontier?
CAPTAIN
Truly to speak, and with no addition,
We go to gain a little patch of ground
That hath in it no profit but the name.
To pay five ducats, five, I would not farm it;
Nor will it yield to Norway or the Pole
A ranker rate, should it be sold in fee.
HAMLET
Why, then, the Polack never will defend it.
CAPTAIN
Yes, it is already garrisoned.
HAMLET
Two thousand souls and twenty thousand ducats
Will not debate the question of this straw.
This is th’ impostume of much wealth and peace,
That inward breaks and shows no cause without
Why the man dies.—I humbly thank you, sir.
CAPTAIN  God be wi’ you, sir.                                              	
He exits.
ROSENCRANTZ  Will ’t please you go, my lord?
HAMLET
I’ll be with you straight. Go a little before.
All but Hamlet exit.
How all occasions do inform against me
And spur my dull revenge. What is a man
If his chief good and market of his time
Be but to sleep and feed? A beast, no more.
Sure He that made us with such large discourse,
Looking before and after, gave us not
That capability and godlike reason
To fust in us unused. Now whether it be
Bestial oblivion or some craven scruple
Of thinking too precisely on th’ event
(A thought which, quartered, hath but one part
wisdom
And ever three parts coward), I do not know
Why yet I live to say “This thing’s to do,”
Sith I have cause, and will, and strength, and means
To do ’t. Examples gross as Earth exhort me:
Witness this army of such mass and charge,
Led by a delicate and tender prince,
Whose spirit with divine ambition puffed
Makes mouths at the invisible event,
Exposing what is mortal and unsure
To all that fortune, death, and danger dare,
Even for an eggshell. Rightly to be great
Is not to stir without great argument,
But greatly to find quarrel in a straw
When honor’s at the stake. How stand I, then,
That have a father killed, a mother stained,
Excitements of my reason and my blood,
And let all sleep, while to my shame I see
The imminent death of twenty thousand men
That for a fantasy and trick of fame
Go to their graves like beds, fight for a plot
Whereon the numbers cannot try the cause,
Which is not tomb enough and continent
To hide the slain? O, from this time forth
My thoughts be bloody or be nothing worth!
He exits.
 
Scene 5
Enter Horatio, Queen, and a Gentleman.
 
QUEEN  I will not speak with her.
GENTLEMAN  She is importunate,
Indeed distract; her mood will needs be pitied.
QUEEN  What would she have?
GENTLEMAN
She speaks much of her father, says she hears
There’s tricks i’ th’ world, and hems, and beats her
heart,
Spurns enviously at straws, speaks things in doubt
That carry but half sense. Her speech is nothing,
Yet the unshapèd use of it doth move
The hearers to collection. They aim at it
And botch the words up fit to their own thoughts;
Which, as her winks and nods and gestures yield
them,
Indeed would make one think there might be
thought,
Though nothing sure, yet much unhappily.
HORATIO
’Twere good she were spoken with, for she may
strew
Dangerous conjectures in ill-breeding minds.
QUEEN  Let her come in.                                           	
Gentleman exits.
Aside. To my sick soul (as sin’s true nature is),
Each toy seems prologue to some great amiss.
So full of artless jealousy is guilt,
It spills itself in fearing to be spilt.
 
Enter Ophelia distracted.
 
OPHELIA
Where is the beauteous Majesty of Denmark?
QUEEN  How now, Ophelia?
OPHELIA sings
       	How should I your true love know
       	   From another one?
       	By his cockle hat and staff
       	   And his sandal shoon.
QUEEN
Alas, sweet lady, what imports this song?
OPHELIA  Say you? Nay, pray you, mark.
Sings. He is dead and gone, lady,
       	   He is dead and gone;
       	At his head a grass-green turf,
       	   At his heels a stone.
Oh, ho!
QUEEN  Nay, but Ophelia—
OPHELIA  Pray you, mark.
Sings. White his shroud as the mountain snow—
 
Enter King.
 
QUEEN  Alas, look here, my lord.
OPHELIA sings
       	   Larded all with sweet flowers;
       	Which bewept to the ground did not go
       	   With true-love showers.
KING  How do you, pretty lady?
OPHELIA  Well, God dild you. They say the owl was a
baker’s daughter. Lord, we know what we are but
know not what we may be. God be at your table.
KING  Conceit upon her father.
OPHELIA  Pray let’s have no words of this, but when
they ask you what it means, say you this:
Sings. Tomorrow is Saint Valentine’s day,
       	   All in the morning betime,
       	And I a maid at your window,
       	   To be your Valentine.
       	Then up he rose and donned his clothes
       	   And dupped the chamber door,
       	Let in the maid, that out a maid
       	   Never departed more.
KING  Pretty Ophelia—
OPHELIA
Indeed, without an oath, I’ll make an end on ’t:
Sings. By Gis and by Saint Charity,
       	   Alack and fie for shame,
       	Young men will do ’t, if they come to ’t;
       	   By Cock, they are to blame.
       	Quoth she “Before you tumbled me,
       	   You promised me to wed.”
He answers:
       	“So would I ’a done, by yonder sun,
       	   An thou hadst not come to my bed.”
KING  How long hath she been thus?
OPHELIA  I hope all will be well. We must be patient,
but I cannot choose but weep to think they would
lay him i’ th’ cold ground. My brother shall know of
it. And so I thank you for your good counsel. Come,
my coach! Good night, ladies, good night, sweet
ladies, good night, good night.                                        	
She exits.
KING
Follow her close; give her good watch, I pray you.
Horatio exits.
O, this is the poison of deep grief. It springs
All from her father’s death, and now behold!
O Gertrude, Gertrude,
When sorrows come, they come not single spies,
But in battalions: first, her father slain;
Next, your son gone, and he most violent author
Of his own just remove; the people muddied,
Thick, and unwholesome in their thoughts and
whispers
For good Polonius’ death, and we have done but
greenly
In hugger-mugger to inter him; poor Ophelia
Divided from herself and her fair judgment,
Without the which we are pictures or mere beasts;
Last, and as much containing as all these,
Her brother is in secret come from France,
Feeds on his wonder, keeps himself in clouds,
And wants not buzzers to infect his ear
With pestilent speeches of his father’s death,
Wherein necessity, of matter beggared,
Will nothing stick our person to arraign
In ear and ear. O, my dear Gertrude, this,
Like to a murd’ring piece, in many places
Gives me superfluous death.
A noise within.
QUEEN  Alack, what noise is this?
KING  Attend!
Where is my Switzers? Let them guard the door.
 
Enter a Messenger.
 
What is the matter?
MESSENGER  Save yourself, my lord.
The ocean, overpeering of his list,
Eats not the flats with more impiteous haste
Than young Laertes, in a riotous head,
O’erbears your officers. The rabble call him “lord,”
And, as the world were now but to begin,
Antiquity forgot, custom not known,
The ratifiers and props of every word,
They cry “Choose we, Laertes shall be king!”
Caps, hands, and tongues applaud it to the clouds,
“Laertes shall be king! Laertes king!”
A noise within.
QUEEN
How cheerfully on the false trail they cry.
O, this is counter, you false Danish dogs!
KING  The doors are broke.
 
Enter Laertes with others.

LAERTES
Where is this king?—Sirs, stand you all without.
ALL  No, let’s come in!
LAERTES  I pray you, give me leave.
ALL  We will, we will.
LAERTES
I thank you. Keep the door. Followers exit. O, thou
vile king,
Give me my father!
QUEEN  Calmly, good Laertes.
LAERTES
That drop of blood that’s calm proclaims me
bastard,
Cries “cuckold” to my father, brands the harlot
Even here between the chaste unsmirchèd brow
Of my true mother.
KING  What is the cause, Laertes,
That thy rebellion looks so giant-like?—
Let him go, Gertrude. Do not fear our person.
There’s such divinity doth hedge a king
That treason can but peep to what it would,
Acts little of his will.—Tell me, Laertes,
Why thou art thus incensed.—Let him go,
Gertrude.—
Speak, man.
LAERTES  Where is my father?
KING  Dead.
QUEEN
But not by him.
KING  Let him demand his fill.
LAERTES
How came he dead? I’ll not be juggled with.
To hell, allegiance! Vows, to the blackest devil!
Conscience and grace, to the profoundest pit!
I dare damnation. To this point I stand,
That both the worlds I give to negligence,
Let come what comes, only I’ll be revenged
Most throughly for my father.
KING  Who shall stay you?
LAERTES  My will, not all the world.
And for my means, I’ll husband them so well
They shall go far with little.
KING  Good Laertes,
If you desire to know the certainty
Of your dear father, is ’t writ in your revenge
That, swoopstake, you will draw both friend and
foe,
Winner and loser?
LAERTES  None but his enemies.
KING  Will you know them, then?
LAERTES
To his good friends thus wide I’ll ope my arms
And, like the kind life-rend’ring pelican,
Repast them with my blood.
KING  Why, now you speak
Like a good child and a true gentleman.
That I am guiltless of your father’s death
And am most sensibly in grief for it,
It shall as level to your judgment ’pear
As day does to your eye.
  A noise within: “Let her come in!”
LAERTES  How now, what noise is that?
 
Enter Ophelia.
 
O heat, dry up my brains! Tears seven times salt
Burn out the sense and virtue of mine eye!
By heaven, thy madness shall be paid with weight
Till our scale turn the beam! O rose of May,
Dear maid, kind sister, sweet Ophelia!
O heavens, is ’t possible a young maid’s wits
Should be as mortal as an old man’s life?
Nature is fine in love, and, where ’tis fine,
It sends some precious instance of itself
After the thing it loves.
OPHELIA sings
       	They bore him barefaced on the bier,
       	Hey non nonny, nonny, hey nonny,
       	And in his grave rained many a tear.
Fare you well, my dove.
LAERTES
Hadst thou thy wits and didst persuade revenge,
It could not move thus.
OPHELIA  You must sing “A-down a-down”—and you
“Call him a-down-a.”—O, how the wheel becomes
it! It is the false steward that stole his master’s
daughter.
LAERTES  This nothing’s more than matter.
OPHELIA  There’s rosemary, that’s for remembrance.
Pray you, love, remember. And there is pansies,
that’s for thoughts.
LAERTES  A document in madness: thoughts and remembrance
fitted.
OPHELIA  There’s fennel for you, and columbines.
There’s rue for you, and here’s some for me; we
may call it herb of grace o’ Sundays. You must wear
your rue with a difference. There’s a daisy. I would
give you some violets, but they withered all when
my father died. They say he made a good end.
Sings. For bonny sweet Robin is all my joy.
LAERTES
Thought and afflictions, passion, hell itself
She turns to favor and to prettiness.
OPHELIA sings
       	And will he not come again?
       	And will he not come again?
       	   No, no, he is dead.
       	   Go to thy deathbed.
       	He never will come again.
 
       	His beard was as white as snow,
       	All flaxen was his poll.
       	   He is gone, he is gone,
       	   And we cast away moan.
       	God ’a mercy on his soul.
And of all Christians’ souls, I pray God. God be wi’
you.                                                                                    	
She exits.
LAERTES  Do you see this, O God?
KING
Laertes, I must commune with your grief,
Or you deny me right. Go but apart,
Make choice of whom your wisest friends you will,
And they shall hear and judge ’twixt you and me.
If by direct or by collateral hand
They find us touched, we will our kingdom give,
Our crown, our life, and all that we call ours,
To you in satisfaction; but if not,
Be you content to lend your patience to us,
And we shall jointly labor with your soul
To give it due content.
LAERTES  Let this be so.
His means of death, his obscure funeral
(No trophy, sword, nor hatchment o’er his bones,
No noble rite nor formal ostentation)
Cry to be heard, as ’twere from heaven to earth,
That I must call ’t in question.
KING  So you shall,
And where th’ offense is, let the great ax fall.
I pray you, go with me.
They exit.
 
Scene 6
Enter Horatio and others.
 
HORATIO  What are they that would speak with me?
GENTLEMAN  Seafaring men, sir. They say they have
letters for you.
HORATIO  Let them come in. Gentleman exits. I do not
know from what part of the world I should be
greeted, if not from Lord Hamlet.
 
Enter Sailors.
 
SAILOR  God bless you, sir.
HORATIO  Let Him bless thee too.
SAILOR  He shall, sir, an ’t please Him. There’s a letter
for you, sir. It came from th’ ambassador that was
bound for England—if your name be Horatio, as I
am let to know it is.                              	
He hands Horatio a letter.
HORATIO reads the letter  Horatio, when thou shalt have
overlooked this, give these fellows some means to the
King. They have letters for him. Ere we were two days
old at sea, a pirate of very warlike appointment gave
us chase. Finding ourselves too slow of sail, we put on
a compelled valor, and in the grapple I boarded them.
On the instant, they got clear of our ship; so I alone
became their prisoner. They have dealt with me like
thieves of mercy, but they knew what they did: I am to
do a good turn for them. Let the King have the letters
I have sent, and repair thou to me with as much speed
as thou wouldst fly death. I have words to speak in
thine ear will make thee dumb; yet are they much too
light for the bore of the matter. These good fellows
will bring thee where I am. Rosencrantz and Guildenstern
hold their course for England; of them I have
much to tell thee. Farewell.
He that thou knowest thine,
Hamlet.
Come, I will give you way for these your letters
And do ’t the speedier that you may direct me
To him from whom you brought them.
They exit.
 
Scene 7
Enter King and Laertes.
 
KING
Now must your conscience my acquittance seal,
And you must put me in your heart for friend,
Sith you have heard, and with a knowing ear,
That he which hath your noble father slain
Pursued my life.
LAERTES  It well appears. But tell me
Why you proceeded not against these feats,
So criminal and so capital in nature,
As by your safety, greatness, wisdom, all things else,
You mainly were stirred up.
KING  O, for two special reasons,
Which may to you perhaps seem much unsinewed,
But yet to me they’re strong. The Queen his mother
Lives almost by his looks, and for myself
(My virtue or my plague, be it either which),
She is so conjunctive to my life and soul
That, as the star moves not but in his sphere,
I could not but by her. The other motive
Why to a public count I might not go
Is the great love the general gender bear him,
Who, dipping all his faults in their affection,
Work like the spring that turneth wood to stone,
Convert his gyves to graces, so that my arrows,
Too slightly timbered for so loud a wind,
Would have reverted to my bow again,
But not where I have aimed them.
LAERTES
And so have I a noble father lost,
A sister driven into desp’rate terms,
Whose worth, if praises may go back again,
Stood challenger on mount of all the age
For her perfections. But my revenge will come.
KING
Break not your sleeps for that. You must not think
That we are made of stuff so flat and dull
That we can let our beard be shook with danger
And think it pastime. You shortly shall hear more.
I loved your father, and we love ourself,
And that, I hope, will teach you to imagine—
 
Enter a Messenger with letters.
 
How now? What news?
MESSENGER  Letters, my lord, from
Hamlet.
These to your Majesty, this to the Queen.
KING  From Hamlet? Who brought them?
MESSENGER
Sailors, my lord, they say. I saw them not.
They were given me by Claudio. He received them
Of him that brought them.
KING  Laertes, you shall hear
them.—
Leave us.                                                                  	
Messenger exits.
Reads. High and mighty, you shall know I am set
naked on your kingdom. Tomorrow shall I beg leave to
see your kingly eyes, when I shall (first asking your
pardon) thereunto recount the occasion of my sudden
and more strange return. Hamlet.
What should this mean? Are all the rest come back?
Or is it some abuse and no such thing?
LAERTES  Know you the hand?
KING  ’Tis Hamlet’s character. “Naked”—
And in a postscript here, he says “alone.”
Can you advise me?
LAERTES
I am lost in it, my lord. But let him come.
It warms the very sickness in my heart
That I shall live and tell him to his teeth
“Thus didst thou.”
KING  If it be so, Laertes
(As how should it be so? how otherwise?),
Will you be ruled by me?
LAERTES  Ay, my lord,
So you will not o’errule me to a peace.
KING
To thine own peace. If he be now returned,
As checking at his voyage, and that he means
No more to undertake it, I will work him
To an exploit, now ripe in my device,
Under the which he shall not choose but fall;
And for his death no wind of blame shall breathe,
But even his mother shall uncharge the practice
And call it accident.
LAERTES  My lord, I will be ruled,
The rather if you could devise it so
That I might be the organ.
KING  It falls right.
You have been talked of since your travel much,
And that in Hamlet’s hearing, for a quality
Wherein they say you shine. Your sum of parts
Did not together pluck such envy from him
As did that one, and that, in my regard,
Of the unworthiest siege.
LAERTES  What part is that, my lord?
KING
A very ribbon in the cap of youth—
Yet needful too, for youth no less becomes
The light and careless livery that it wears
Than settled age his sables and his weeds,
Importing health and graveness. Two months since
Here was a gentleman of Normandy.
I have seen myself, and served against, the French,
And they can well on horseback, but this gallant
Had witchcraft in ’t. He grew unto his seat,
And to such wondrous doing brought his horse
As had he been encorpsed and demi-natured
With the brave beast. So far he topped my thought
That I in forgery of shapes and tricks
Come short of what he did.
LAERTES  A Norman was ’t?
KING  A Norman.
LAERTES
Upon my life, Lamord.
KING  The very same.
LAERTES
I know him well. He is the brooch indeed
And gem of all the nation.
KING  He made confession of you
And gave you such a masterly report
For art and exercise in your defense,
And for your rapier most especial,
That he cried out ’twould be a sight indeed
If one could match you. The ’scrimers of their
nation
He swore had neither motion, guard, nor eye,
If you opposed them. Sir, this report of his
Did Hamlet so envenom with his envy
That he could nothing do but wish and beg
Your sudden coming-o’er, to play with you.
Now out of this—
LAERTES  What out of this, my lord?
KING
Laertes, was your father dear to you?
Or are you like the painting of a sorrow,
A face without a heart?
LAERTES  Why ask you this?
KING
Not that I think you did not love your father,
But that I know love is begun by time
And that I see, in passages of proof,
Time qualifies the spark and fire of it.
There lives within the very flame of love
A kind of wick or snuff that will abate it,
And nothing is at a like goodness still;
For goodness, growing to a pleurisy,
Dies in his own too-much. That we would do
We should do when we would; for this “would”
changes
And hath abatements and delays as many
As there are tongues, are hands, are accidents;
And then this “should” is like a spendthrift sigh,
That hurts by easing. But to the quick of th’ ulcer:
Hamlet comes back; what would you undertake
To show yourself indeed your father’s son
More than in words?
LAERTES  To cut his throat i’ th’ church.
KING
No place indeed should murder sanctuarize;
Revenge should have no bounds. But, good Laertes,
Will you do this? Keep close within your chamber.
Hamlet, returned, shall know you are come home.
We’ll put on those shall praise your excellence
And set a double varnish on the fame
The Frenchman gave you; bring you, in fine,
together
And wager on your heads. He, being remiss,
Most generous, and free from all contriving,
Will not peruse the foils, so that with ease,
Or with a little shuffling, you may choose
A sword unbated, and in a pass of practice
Requite him for your father.
LAERTES  I will do ’t,
And for that purpose I’ll anoint my sword.
I bought an unction of a mountebank
So mortal that, but dip a knife in it,
Where it draws blood no cataplasm so rare,
Collected from all simples that have virtue
Under the moon, can save the thing from death
That is but scratched withal. I’ll touch my point
With this contagion, that, if I gall him slightly,
It may be death.
KING  Let’s further think of this,
Weigh what convenience both of time and means
May fit us to our shape. If this should fail,
And that our drift look through our bad
performance,
’Twere better not assayed. Therefore this project
Should have a back or second that might hold
If this did blast in proof. Soft, let me see.
We’ll make a solemn wager on your cunnings—
I ha ’t!
When in your motion you are hot and dry
(As make your bouts more violent to that end)
And that he calls for drink, I’ll have prepared
him
A chalice for the nonce, whereon but sipping,
If he by chance escape your venomed stuck,
Our purpose may hold there.—But stay, what
noise?
 
Enter Queen.
 
QUEEN
One woe doth tread upon another’s heel,
So fast they follow. Your sister’s drowned, Laertes.
LAERTES  Drowned? O, where?
QUEEN
There is a willow grows askant the brook
That shows his hoar leaves in the glassy stream.
Therewith fantastic garlands did she make
Of crowflowers, nettles, daisies, and long purples,
That liberal shepherds give a grosser name,
But our cold maids do “dead men’s fingers” call
them.
There on the pendant boughs her coronet weeds
Clamb’ring to hang, an envious sliver broke,
When down her weedy trophies and herself
Fell in the weeping brook. Her clothes spread wide,
And mermaid-like awhile they bore her up,
Which time she chanted snatches of old lauds,
As one incapable of her own distress
Or like a creature native and endued
Unto that element. But long it could not be
Till that her garments, heavy with their drink,
Pulled the poor wretch from her melodious lay
To muddy death.
LAERTES  Alas, then she is drowned.
QUEEN  Drowned, drowned.
LAERTES
Too much of water hast thou, poor Ophelia,
And therefore I forbid my tears. But yet
It is our trick; nature her custom holds,
Let shame say what it will. When these are gone,
The woman will be out.—Adieu, my lord.
I have a speech o’ fire that fain would blaze,
But that this folly drowns it.                                                	
He exits.
KING  Let’s follow, Gertrude.
How much I had to do to calm his rage!
Now fear I this will give it start again.
Therefore, let’s follow.
They exit.
 
 
 

 
 
ACT 5
 
Scene 1
Enter Gravedigger and Another.
 
GRAVEDIGGER  Is she to be buried in Christian burial,
when she willfully seeks her own salvation?
OTHER  I tell thee she is. Therefore make her grave
straight. The crowner hath sat on her and finds it
Christian burial.
GRAVEDIGGER  How can that be, unless she drowned
herself in her own defense?
OTHER  Why, ’tis found so.
GRAVEDIGGER  It must be se offendendo; it cannot be
else. For here lies the point: if I drown myself
wittingly, it argues an act, and an act hath three
branches—it is to act, to do, to perform. Argal, she
drowned herself wittingly.
OTHER  Nay, but hear you, goodman delver—
GRAVEDIGGER  Give me leave. Here lies the water;
good. Here stands the man; good. If the man go to
this water and drown himself, it is (will he, nill he)
he goes; mark you that. But if the water come to him
and drown him, he drowns not himself. Argal, he
that is not guilty of his own death shortens not his
own life.
OTHER  But is this law?
GRAVEDIGGER  Ay, marry, is ’t—crowner’s ’quest law.
OTHER  Will you ha’ the truth on ’t? If this had not been
a gentlewoman, she should have been buried out o’
Christian burial.
GRAVEDIGGER  Why, there thou sayst. And the more
pity that great folk should have count’nance in this
world to drown or hang themselves more than
their even-Christian. Come, my spade. There is no
ancient gentlemen but gard’ners, ditchers, and
grave-makers. They hold up Adam’s profession.
OTHER  Was he a gentleman?
GRAVEDIGGER  He was the first that ever bore arms.
OTHER  Why, he had none.
GRAVEDIGGER  What, art a heathen? How dost thou
understand the scripture? The scripture says Adam
digged. Could he dig without arms? I’ll put another
question to thee. If thou answerest me not to the
purpose, confess thyself—
OTHER  Go to!
GRAVEDIGGER  What is he that builds stronger than
either the mason, the shipwright, or the carpenter?
OTHER  The gallows-maker; for that frame outlives a
thousand tenants.
GRAVEDIGGER  I like thy wit well, in good faith. The
gallows does well. But how does it well? It does
well to those that do ill. Now, thou dost ill to say the
gallows is built stronger than the church. Argal, the
gallows may do well to thee. To ’t again, come.
OTHER  “Who builds stronger than a mason, a shipwright,
or a carpenter?”
GRAVEDIGGER  Ay, tell me that, and unyoke.
OTHER  Marry, now I can tell.
GRAVEDIGGER  To ’t.
OTHER  Mass, I cannot tell.
 
Enter Hamlet and Horatio afar off.
 
GRAVEDIGGER  Cudgel thy brains no more about it,
for your dull ass will not mend his pace with
beating. And, when you are asked this question
next, say “a grave-maker.” The houses he makes
lasts till doomsday. Go, get thee in, and fetch me a
stoup of liquor.
The Other Man exits
and the Gravedigger digs and sings.
       	In youth when I did love, did love,
       	   Methought it was very sweet
       	To contract—O—the time for—a—my behove,
       	   O, methought there—a—was nothing—a—meet.
HAMLET  Has this fellow no feeling of his business? He
sings in grave-making.
HORATIO  Custom hath made it in him a property of
easiness.
HAMLET  ’Tis e’en so. The hand of little employment
hath the daintier sense.
GRAVEDIGGER sings
       	But age with his stealing steps
       	Hath clawed me in his clutch,
       	And hath shipped me into the land,
       	As if I had never been such.
He digs up a skull.
HAMLET  That skull had a tongue in it and could sing
once. How the knave jowls it to the ground as if
’twere Cain’s jawbone, that did the first murder!
This might be the pate of a politician which this ass
now o’erreaches, one that would circumvent God,
might it not?
HORATIO  It might, my lord.
HAMLET  Or of a courtier, which could say “Good
morrow, sweet lord! How dost thou, sweet lord?”
This might be my Lord Such-a-one that praised my
Lord Such-a-one’s horse when he went to beg it,
might it not?
HORATIO  Ay, my lord.
HAMLET  Why, e’en so. And now my Lady Worm’s,
chapless and knocked about the mazard with a
sexton’s spade. Here’s fine revolution, an we had
the trick to see ’t. Did these bones cost no more the
breeding but to play at loggets with them? Mine
ache to think on ’t.
GRAVEDIGGER sings
       	A pickax and a spade, a spade,
       	For and a shrouding sheet,
       	O, a pit of clay for to be made
       	For such a guest is meet.
He digs up more skulls.
HAMLET  There’s another. Why may not that be the
skull of a lawyer? Where be his quiddities now, his
quillities, his cases, his tenures, and his tricks? Why
does he suffer this mad knave now to knock him
about the sconce with a dirty shovel and will not tell
him of his action of battery? Hum, this fellow might
be in ’s time a great buyer of land, with his statutes,
his recognizances, his fines, his double vouchers,
his recoveries. Is this the fine of his fines and the
recovery of his recoveries, to have his fine pate full
of fine dirt? Will his vouchers vouch him no more
of his purchases, and double ones too, than the
length and breadth of a pair of indentures? The very
conveyances of his lands will scarcely lie in this box,
and must th’ inheritor himself have no more, ha?
HORATIO  Not a jot more, my lord.
HAMLET  Is not parchment made of sheepskins?
HORATIO  Ay, my lord, and of calves’ skins too.
HAMLET  They are sheep and calves which seek out
assurance in that. I will speak to this fellow.—
Whose grave’s this, sirrah?
GRAVEDIGGER  Mine, sir.
Sings. O, a pit of clay for to be made
       	For such a guest is meet.
HAMLET  I think it be thine indeed, for thou liest in ’t.
GRAVEDIGGER  You lie out on ’t, sir, and therefore ’tis
not yours. For my part, I do not lie in ’t, yet it is
mine.
HAMLET  Thou dost lie in ’t, to be in ’t and say it is thine.
’Tis for the dead, not for the quick; therefore thou
liest.
GRAVEDIGGER  ’Tis a quick lie, sir; ’twill away again
from me to you.
HAMLET  What man dost thou dig it for?
GRAVEDIGGER  For no man, sir.
HAMLET  What woman then?
GRAVEDIGGER  For none, neither.
HAMLET  Who is to be buried in ’t?
GRAVEDIGGER  One that was a woman, sir, but, rest
her soul, she’s dead.
HAMLET  How absolute the knave is! We must speak by
the card, or equivocation will undo us. By the
Lord, Horatio, this three years I have took note of
it: the age is grown so picked that the toe of the
peasant comes so near the heel of the courtier, he
galls his kibe.—How long hast thou been
grave-maker?
GRAVEDIGGER  Of all the days i’ th’ year, I came to ’t
that day that our last King Hamlet overcame
Fortinbras.
HAMLET  How long is that since?
GRAVEDIGGER  Cannot you tell that? Every fool can
tell that. It was that very day that young Hamlet
was born—he that is mad, and sent into England.
HAMLET  Ay, marry, why was he sent into England?
GRAVEDIGGER  Why, because he was mad. He shall
recover his wits there. Or if he do not, ’tis no great
matter there.
HAMLET  Why?
GRAVEDIGGER  ’Twill not be seen in him there. There
the men are as mad as he.
HAMLET  How came he mad?
GRAVEDIGGER  Very strangely, they say.
HAMLET  How “strangely”?
GRAVEDIGGER  Faith, e’en with losing his wits.
HAMLET  Upon what ground?
GRAVEDIGGER  Why, here in Denmark. I have been
sexton here, man and boy, thirty years.
HAMLET  How long will a man lie i’ th’ earth ere he rot?
GRAVEDIGGER  Faith, if he be not rotten before he die
(as we have many pocky corses nowadays that will
scarce hold the laying in), he will last you some
eight year or nine year. A tanner will last you nine
year.
HAMLET  Why he more than another?
GRAVEDIGGER  Why, sir, his hide is so tanned with his
trade that he will keep out water a great while; and
your water is a sore decayer of your whoreson dead
body. Here’s a skull now hath lien you i’ th’ earth
three-and-twenty years.
HAMLET  Whose was it?
GRAVEDIGGER  A whoreson mad fellow’s it was.
Whose do you think it was?
HAMLET  Nay, I know not.
GRAVEDIGGER  A pestilence on him for a mad rogue!
He poured a flagon of Rhenish on my head once.
This same skull, sir, was, sir, Yorick’s skull, the
King’s jester.
HAMLET  This?
GRAVEDIGGER  E’en that.
HAMLET, taking the skull  Let me see. Alas, poor
Yorick! I knew him, Horatio—a fellow of infinite
jest, of most excellent fancy. He hath bore me on his
back a thousand times, and now how abhorred in
my imagination it is! My gorge rises at it. Here hung
those lips that I have kissed I know not how oft.
Where be your gibes now? your gambols? your
songs? your flashes of merriment that were wont to
set the table on a roar? Not one now to mock your
own grinning? Quite chapfallen? Now get you to my
lady’s chamber, and tell her, let her paint an inch
thick, to this favor she must come. Make her laugh
at that.—Prithee, Horatio, tell me one thing.
HORATIO  What’s that, my lord?
HAMLET  Dost thou think Alexander looked o’ this
fashion i’ th’ earth?
HORATIO  E’en so.
HAMLET  And smelt so? Pah!                       	
He puts the skull down.
HORATIO  E’en so, my lord.
HAMLET  To what base uses we may return, Horatio!
Why may not imagination trace the noble dust of
Alexander till he find it stopping a bunghole?
HORATIO  ’Twere to consider too curiously to consider
so.
HAMLET  No, faith, not a jot; but to follow him thither,
with modesty enough and likelihood to lead it, as
thus: Alexander died, Alexander was buried, Alexander
returneth to dust; the dust is earth; of earth
we make loam; and why of that loam whereto he
was converted might they not stop a beer barrel?
Imperious Caesar, dead and turned to clay,
Might stop a hole to keep the wind away.
O, that that earth which kept the world in awe
Should patch a wall t’ expel the winter’s flaw!
 
Enter King, Queen, Laertes, Lords attendant, and the
corpse of Ophelia, with a Doctor of Divinity.
 
But soft, but soft awhile! Here comes the King,
The Queen, the courtiers. Who is this they follow?
And with such maimèd rites? This doth betoken
The corse they follow did with desp’rate hand
Fordo its own life. ’Twas of some estate.
Couch we awhile and mark.                                    	
They step aside.
LAERTES  What ceremony else?
HAMLET  That is Laertes, a very noble youth. Mark.
LAERTES  What ceremony else?
DOCTOR
Her obsequies have been as far enlarged
As we have warranty. Her death was doubtful,
And, but that great command o’ersways the order,
She should in ground unsanctified been lodged
Till the last trumpet. For charitable prayers
Shards, flints, and pebbles should be thrown on
her.
Yet here she is allowed her virgin crants,
Her maiden strewments, and the bringing home
Of bell and burial.
LAERTES
Must there no more be done?
DOCTOR  No more be done.
We should profane the service of the dead
To sing a requiem and such rest to her
As to peace-parted souls.
LAERTES  Lay her i’ th’ earth,
And from her fair and unpolluted flesh
May violets spring! I tell thee, churlish priest,
A minist’ring angel shall my sister be
When thou liest howling.
HAMLET, to Horatio  What, the fair Ophelia?
QUEEN  Sweets to the sweet, farewell!
She scatters flowers.
I hoped thou shouldst have been my Hamlet’s wife;
I thought thy bride-bed to have decked, sweet maid,
And not have strewed thy grave.
LAERTES  O, treble woe
Fall ten times treble on that cursèd head
Whose wicked deed thy most ingenious sense
Deprived thee of!—Hold off the earth awhile,
Till I have caught her once more in mine arms.
Leaps in the grave.
Now pile your dust upon the quick and dead,
Till of this flat a mountain you have made
T’ o’ertop old Pelion or the skyish head
Of blue Olympus.
HAMLET, advancing
What is he whose grief
Bears such an emphasis, whose phrase of sorrow
Conjures the wand’ring stars and makes them stand
Like wonder-wounded hearers? This is I,
Hamlet the Dane.
LAERTES, coming out of the grave
The devil take thy soul!
HAMLET  Thou pray’st not well.                                  	
They grapple.
I prithee take thy fingers from my throat,
For though I am not splenitive and rash,
Yet have I in me something dangerous,
Which let thy wisdom fear. Hold off thy hand.
KING  Pluck them asunder.
QUEEN  Hamlet! Hamlet!
ALL  Gentlemen!
HORATIO  Good my lord, be quiet.
Hamlet and Laertes are separated.
HAMLET
Why, I will fight with him upon this theme
Until my eyelids will no longer wag!
QUEEN  O my son, what theme?
HAMLET
I loved Ophelia. Forty thousand brothers
Could not with all their quantity of love
Make up my sum. What wilt thou do for her?
KING  O, he is mad, Laertes!
QUEEN  For love of God, forbear him.
HAMLET  ’Swounds, show me what thou ’t do.
Woo’t weep, woo’t fight, woo’t fast, woo’t tear
thyself,
Woo’t drink up eisel, eat a crocodile?
I’ll do ’t. Dost thou come here to whine?
To outface me with leaping in her grave?
Be buried quick with her, and so will I.
And if thou prate of mountains, let them throw
Millions of acres on us, till our ground,
Singeing his pate against the burning zone,
Make Ossa like a wart. Nay, an thou ’lt mouth,
I’ll rant as well as thou.
QUEEN  This is mere madness;
And thus awhile the fit will work on him.
Anon, as patient as the female dove
When that her golden couplets are disclosed,
His silence will sit drooping.
HAMLET  Hear you, sir,
What is the reason that you use me thus?
I loved you ever. But it is no matter.
Let Hercules himself do what he may,
The cat will mew, and dog will have his day.
Hamlet exits.
KING
I pray thee, good Horatio, wait upon him.
Horatio exits.
To Laertes. Strengthen your patience in our last
night’s speech.
We’ll put the matter to the present push.—
Good Gertrude, set some watch over your son.—
This grave shall have a living monument.
An hour of quiet thereby shall we see.
Till then in patience our proceeding be.
They exit.
 
Scene 2
Enter Hamlet and Horatio.
 
HAMLET
So much for this, sir. Now shall you see the other.
You do remember all the circumstance?
HORATIO  Remember it, my lord!
HAMLET
Sir, in my heart there was a kind of fighting
That would not let me sleep. Methought I lay
Worse than the mutines in the bilboes. Rashly—
And praised be rashness for it; let us know,
Our indiscretion sometime serves us well
When our deep plots do pall; and that should learn
us
There’s a divinity that shapes our ends,
Rough-hew them how we will—
HORATIO  That is most
certain.
HAMLET  Up from my cabin,
My sea-gown scarfed about me, in the dark
Groped I to find out them; had my desire,
Fingered their packet, and in fine withdrew
To mine own room again, making so bold
(My fears forgetting manners) to unfold
Their grand commission; where I found, Horatio,
A royal knavery—an exact command,
Larded with many several sorts of reasons
Importing Denmark’s health and England’s too,
With—ho!—such bugs and goblins in my life,
That on the supervise, no leisure bated,
No, not to stay the grinding of the ax,
My head should be struck off.
HORATIO  Is ’t possible?
HAMLET
Here’s the commission. Read it at more leisure.
Handing him a paper.
But wilt thou hear now how I did proceed?
HORATIO  I beseech you.
HAMLET
Being thus benetted round with villainies,
Or I could make a prologue to my brains,
They had begun the play. I sat me down,
Devised a new commission, wrote it fair—
I once did hold it, as our statists do,
A baseness to write fair, and labored much
How to forget that learning; but, sir, now
It did me yeoman’s service. Wilt thou know
Th’ effect of what I wrote?
HORATIO  Ay, good my lord.
HAMLET
An earnest conjuration from the King,
As England was his faithful tributary,
As love between them like the palm might flourish,
As peace should still her wheaten garland wear
And stand a comma ’tween their amities,
And many suchlike ases of great charge,
That, on the view and knowing of these contents,
Without debatement further, more or less,
He should those bearers put to sudden death,
Not shriving time allowed.
HORATIO  How was this sealed?
HAMLET
Why, even in that was heaven ordinant.
I had my father’s signet in my purse,
Which was the model of that Danish seal;
Folded the writ up in the form of th’ other,
Subscribed it, gave ’t th’ impression, placed it
safely,
The changeling never known. Now, the next day
Was our sea-fight; and what to this was sequent
Thou knowest already.
HORATIO
So Guildenstern and Rosencrantz go to ’t.
HAMLET
Why, man, they did make love to this employment.
They are not near my conscience. Their defeat
Does by their own insinuation grow.
’Tis dangerous when the baser nature comes
Between the pass and fell incensèd points
Of mighty opposites.
HORATIO  Why, what a king is this!
HAMLET
Does it not, think thee, stand me now upon—
He that hath killed my king and whored my mother,
Popped in between th’ election and my hopes,
Thrown out his angle for my proper life,
And with such cozenage—is ’t not perfect
conscience
To quit him with this arm? And is ’t not to be
damned
To let this canker of our nature come
In further evil?
HORATIO
It must be shortly known to him from England
What is the issue of the business there.
HAMLET
It will be short. The interim’s mine,
And a man’s life’s no more than to say “one.”
But I am very sorry, good Horatio,
That to Laertes I forgot myself,
For by the image of my cause I see
The portraiture of his. I’ll court his favors.
But, sure, the bravery of his grief did put me
Into a tow’ring passion.
HORATIO  Peace, who comes here?
 
Enter Osric, a courtier.
 
OSRIC  Your Lordship is right welcome back to
Denmark.
HAMLET  I humbly thank you, sir. Aside to Horatio.
Dost know this waterfly?
HORATIO, aside to Hamlet  No, my good lord.
HAMLET, aside to Horatio  Thy state is the more gracious,
for ’tis a vice to know him. He hath much
land, and fertile. Let a beast be lord of beasts and his
crib shall stand at the king’s mess. ’Tis a chough,
but, as I say, spacious in the possession of dirt.
OSRIC  Sweet lord, if your Lordship were at leisure, I
should impart a thing to you from his Majesty.
HAMLET  I will receive it, sir, with all diligence of
spirit. Put your bonnet to his right use: ’tis for the
head.
OSRIC  I thank your Lordship; it is very hot.
HAMLET  No, believe me, ’tis very cold; the wind is
northerly.
OSRIC  It is indifferent cold, my lord, indeed.
HAMLET  But yet methinks it is very sultry and hot for
my complexion.
OSRIC  Exceedingly, my lord; it is very sultry, as
’twere—I cannot tell how. My lord, his Majesty
bade me signify to you that he has laid a great wager
on your head. Sir, this is the matter—
HAMLET  I beseech you, remember. He motions to
Osric to put on his hat.
OSRIC  Nay, good my lord, for my ease, in good faith.
Sir, here is newly come to court Laertes—believe
me, an absolute gentleman, full of most excellent
differences, of very soft society and great showing.
Indeed, to speak feelingly of him, he is the card or
calendar of gentry, for you shall find in him the
continent of what part a gentleman would see.
HAMLET  Sir, his definement suffers no perdition in
you, though I know to divide him inventorially
would dozy th’ arithmetic of memory, and yet but
yaw neither, in respect of his quick sail. But, in the
verity of extolment, I take him to be a soul of great
article, and his infusion of such dearth and rareness
as, to make true diction of him, his semblable is his
mirror, and who else would trace him, his umbrage,
nothing more.
OSRIC  Your Lordship speaks most infallibly of him.
HAMLET  The concernancy, sir? Why do we wrap the
gentleman in our more rawer breath?
OSRIC  Sir?
HORATIO  Is ’t not possible to understand in another
tongue? You will to ’t, sir, really.
HAMLET, to Osric  What imports the nomination of
this gentleman?
OSRIC  Of Laertes?
HORATIO  His purse is empty already; all ’s golden words
are spent.
HAMLET  Of him, sir.
OSRIC  I know you are not ignorant—
HAMLET  I would you did, sir. Yet, in faith, if you did, it
would not much approve me. Well, sir?
OSRIC  You are not ignorant of what excellence Laertes
is—
HAMLET  I dare not confess that, lest I should compare
with him in excellence. But to know a man well
were to know himself.
OSRIC  I mean, sir, for his weapon. But in the imputation
laid on him by them, in his meed he’s
unfellowed.
HAMLET  What’s his weapon?
OSRIC  Rapier and dagger.
HAMLET  That’s two of his weapons. But, well—
OSRIC  The King, sir, hath wagered with him six Barbary
horses, against the which he has impawned, as I
take it, six French rapiers and poniards, with their
assigns, as girdle, hangers, and so. Three of the
carriages, in faith, are very dear to fancy, very
responsive to the hilts, most delicate carriages, and
of very liberal conceit.
HAMLET  What call you the “carriages”?
HORATIO  I knew you must be edified by the margent
ere you had done.
OSRIC  The carriages, sir, are the hangers.
HAMLET  The phrase would be more germane to the
matter if we could carry a cannon by our sides. I
would it might be “hangers” till then. But on. Six
Barbary horses against six French swords, their
assigns, and three liberal-conceited carriages—
that’s the French bet against the Danish. Why is this
all “impawned,” as you call it?
OSRIC  The King, sir, hath laid, sir, that in a dozen
passes between yourself and him, he shall not
exceed you three hits. He hath laid on twelve for
nine, and it would come to immediate trial if your
Lordship would vouchsafe the answer.
HAMLET  How if I answer no?
OSRIC  I mean, my lord, the opposition of your person
in trial.
HAMLET  Sir, I will walk here in the hall. If it please his
Majesty, it is the breathing time of day with me. Let
the foils be brought, the gentleman willing, and the
King hold his purpose, I will win for him, an I can.
If not, I will gain nothing but my shame and the odd
hits.
OSRIC  Shall I deliver you e’en so?
HAMLET  To this effect, sir, after what flourish your
nature will.
OSRIC  I commend my duty to your Lordship.
HAMLET  Yours. Osric exits. He does well to commend
it himself. There are no tongues else for ’s
turn.
HORATIO  This lapwing runs away with the shell on his
head.
HAMLET  He did comply, sir, with his dug before he
sucked it. Thus has he (and many more of the same
breed that I know the drossy age dotes on) only got
the tune of the time, and, out of an habit of
encounter, a kind of yeasty collection, which carries
them through and through the most fanned
and winnowed opinions; and do but blow them to
their trial, the bubbles are out.
 
Enter a Lord.
 
LORD  My lord, his Majesty commended him to you by
young Osric, who brings back to him that you
attend him in the hall. He sends to know if your
pleasure hold to play with Laertes, or that you will
take longer time.
HAMLET  I am constant to my purposes. They follow
the King’s pleasure. If his fitness speaks, mine is
ready now or whensoever, provided I be so able as
now.
LORD  The King and Queen and all are coming down.
HAMLET  In happy time.
LORD  The Queen desires you to use some gentle
entertainment to Laertes before you fall to play.
HAMLET  She well instructs me.                                        	
Lord exits.
HORATIO  You will lose, my lord.
HAMLET  I do not think so. Since he went into France, I
have been in continual practice. I shall win at the
odds; but thou wouldst not think how ill all’s here
about my heart. But it is no matter.
HORATIO  Nay, good my lord—
HAMLET  It is but foolery, but it is such a kind of
gaingiving as would perhaps trouble a woman.
HORATIO  If your mind dislike anything, obey it. I will
forestall their repair hither and say you are not fit.
HAMLET  Not a whit. We defy augury. There is a
special providence in the fall of a sparrow. If it be
now, ’tis not to come; if it be not to come, it will be
now; if it be not now, yet it will come. The
readiness is all. Since no man of aught he leaves
knows, what is ’t to leave betimes? Let be.
 
A table prepared. Enter Trumpets, Drums, and Officers
with cushions, King, Queen, Osric, and all the state,
foils, daggers, flagons of wine, and Laertes.
 
KING
Come, Hamlet, come and take this hand from me.
He puts Laertes’ hand into Hamlet’s.
HAMLET, to Laertes
Give me your pardon, sir. I have done you wrong;
But pardon ’t as you are a gentleman. This presence
knows,
And you must needs have heard, how I am punished
With a sore distraction. What I have done
That might your nature, honor, and exception
Roughly awake, I here proclaim was madness.
Was ’t Hamlet wronged Laertes? Never Hamlet.
If Hamlet from himself be ta’en away,
And when he’s not himself does wrong Laertes,
Then Hamlet does it not; Hamlet denies it.
Who does it, then? His madness. If ’t be so,
Hamlet is of the faction that is wronged;
His madness is poor Hamlet’s enemy.
Sir, in this audience
Let my disclaiming from a purposed evil
Free me so far in your most generous thoughts
That I have shot my arrow o’er the house
And hurt my brother.
LAERTES  I am satisfied in nature,
Whose motive in this case should stir me most
To my revenge; but in my terms of honor
I stand aloof and will no reconcilement
Till by some elder masters of known honor
I have a voice and precedent of peace
To keep my name ungored. But till that time
I do receive your offered love like love
And will not wrong it.
HAMLET  I embrace it freely
And will this brothers’ wager frankly play.—
Give us the foils. Come on.
LAERTES  Come, one for me.
HAMLET
I’ll be your foil, Laertes; in mine ignorance
Your skill shall, like a star i’ th’ darkest night,
Stick fiery off indeed.
LAERTES  You mock me, sir.
HAMLET  No, by this hand.
KING
Give them the foils, young Osric. Cousin Hamlet,
You know the wager?
HAMLET  Very well, my lord.
Your Grace has laid the odds o’ th’ weaker side.
KING
I do not fear it; I have seen you both.
But, since he is better, we have therefore odds.
LAERTES
This is too heavy. Let me see another.
HAMLET
This likes me well. These foils have all a length?
OSRIC  Ay, my good lord.
Prepare to play.
KING
Set me the stoups of wine upon that table.—
If Hamlet give the first or second hit
Or quit in answer of the third exchange,
Let all the battlements their ordnance fire.
The King shall drink to Hamlet’s better breath,
And in the cup an union shall he throw,
Richer than that which four successive kings
In Denmark’s crown have worn. Give me the cups,
And let the kettle to the trumpet speak,
The trumpet to the cannoneer without,
The cannons to the heavens, the heaven to earth,
“Now the King drinks to Hamlet.” Come, begin.
And you, the judges, bear a wary eye.
Trumpets the while.
HAMLET  Come on, sir.
LAERTES  Come, my lord.                                                  	
They play.
HAMLET  One.
LAERTES  No.
HAMLET  Judgment!
OSRIC  A hit, a very palpable hit.
LAERTES  Well, again.
KING
Stay, give me drink.—Hamlet, this pearl is thine.
Here’s to thy health.
He drinks and then drops the pearl in the cup.
Drum, trumpets, and shot.
Give him the cup.
HAMLET
I’ll play this bout first. Set it by awhile.
Come. They play. Another hit. What say you?
LAERTES
A touch, a touch. I do confess ’t.
KING
Our son shall win.
QUEEN  He’s fat and scant of breath.—
Here, Hamlet, take my napkin; rub thy brows.
The Queen carouses to thy fortune, Hamlet.
She lifts the cup.
HAMLET  Good madam.
KING  Gertrude, do not drink.
QUEEN
I will, my lord; I pray you pardon me.                            	
She drinks.
KING, aside
It is the poisoned cup. It is too late.
HAMLET
I dare not drink yet, madam—by and by.
QUEEN  Come, let me wipe thy face.
LAERTES, to Claudius
My lord, I’ll hit him now.
KING  I do not think ’t.
LAERTES, aside
And yet it is almost against my conscience.
HAMLET
Come, for the third, Laertes. You do but dally.
I pray you pass with your best violence.
I am afeard you make a wanton of me.
LAERTES  Say you so? Come on.                                                	
Play.
OSRIC  Nothing neither way.
LAERTES  Have at you now!
Laertes wounds Hamlet. Then in scuffling they change
rapiers, and Hamlet wounds Laertes.
KING  Part them. They are incensed.
HAMLET  Nay, come again.
The Queen falls.
OSRIC  Look to the Queen there, ho!
HORATIO
They bleed on both sides.—How is it, my lord?
OSRIC  How is ’t, Laertes?
LAERTES
Why as a woodcock to mine own springe, Osric.
He falls.
I am justly killed with mine own treachery.
HAMLET
How does the Queen?
KING  She swoons to see them bleed.
QUEEN
No, no, the drink, the drink! O, my dear Hamlet!
The drink, the drink! I am poisoned.                                   	
She dies.
HAMLET
O villainy! Ho! Let the door be locked.                          	
Osric exits.
Treachery! Seek it out.
LAERTES
It is here, Hamlet. Hamlet, thou art slain.
No med’cine in the world can do thee good.
In thee there is not half an hour’s life.
The treacherous instrument is in thy hand,
Unbated and envenomed. The foul practice
Hath turned itself on me. Lo, here I lie,
Never to rise again. Thy mother’s poisoned.
I can no more. The King, the King’s to blame.
HAMLET
The point envenomed too! Then, venom, to thy
work.                                                                        	
Hurts the King.
ALL  Treason, treason!
KING
O, yet defend me, friends! I am but hurt.
HAMLET
Here, thou incestuous, murd’rous, damnèd Dane,
Drink off this potion. Is thy union here?
Forcing him to drink the poison.
Follow my mother.                                                             	
King dies.
LAERTES  He is justly served.
It is a poison tempered by himself.
Exchange forgiveness with me, noble Hamlet.
Mine and my father’s death come not upon thee,
Nor thine on me.                                                                         	
Dies.
HAMLET
Heaven make thee free of it. I follow thee.—
I am dead, Horatio.—Wretched queen, adieu.—
You that look pale and tremble at this chance,
That are but mutes or audience to this act,
Had I but time (as this fell sergeant, Death,
Is strict in his arrest), O, I could tell you—
But let it be.—Horatio, I am dead.
Thou livest; report me and my cause aright
To the unsatisfied.
HORATIO  Never believe it.
I am more an antique Roman than a Dane.
Here’s yet some liquor left.                              	
He picks up the cup.
HAMLET  As thou ’rt a man,
Give me the cup. Let go! By heaven, I’ll ha ’t.
O God, Horatio, what a wounded name,
Things standing thus unknown, shall I leave behind
me!
If thou didst ever hold me in thy heart,
Absent thee from felicity awhile
And in this harsh world draw thy breath in pain
To tell my story.
A march afar off and shot within.
What warlike noise is this?
 
Enter Osric.
 
OSRIC
Young Fortinbras, with conquest come from Poland,
To th’ ambassadors of England gives
This warlike volley.
HAMLET  O, I die, Horatio!
The potent poison quite o’ercrows my spirit.
I cannot live to hear the news from England.
But I do prophesy th’ election lights
On Fortinbras; he has my dying voice.
So tell him, with th’ occurrents, more and less,
Which have solicited—the rest is silence.
O, O, O, O!                                                                                  	
Dies.
HORATIO
Now cracks a noble heart. Good night, sweet prince,
And flights of angels sing thee to thy rest.
March within.
Why does the drum come hither?
 
Enter Fortinbras with the English Ambassadors with
Drum, Colors, and Attendants.
 
FORTINBRAS  Where is this sight?
HORATIO  What is it you would see?
If aught of woe or wonder, cease your search.
FORTINBRAS
This quarry cries on havoc. O proud Death,
What feast is toward in thine eternal cell
That thou so many princes at a shot
So bloodily hast struck?
AMBASSADOR  The sight is dismal,
And our affairs from England come too late.
The ears are senseless that should give us hearing
To tell him his commandment is fulfilled,
That Rosencrantz and Guildenstern are dead.
Where should we have our thanks?
HORATIO  Not from his
mouth,
Had it th’ ability of life to thank you.
He never gave commandment for their death.
But since, so jump upon this bloody question,
You from the Polack wars, and you from England,
Are here arrived, give order that these bodies
High on a stage be placed to the view,
And let me speak to th’ yet unknowing world
How these things came about. So shall you hear
Of carnal, bloody, and unnatural acts,
Of accidental judgments, casual slaughters,
Of deaths put on by cunning and forced cause,
And, in this upshot, purposes mistook
Fall’n on th’ inventors’ heads. All this can I
Truly deliver.
FORTINBRAS  Let us haste to hear it
And call the noblest to the audience.
For me, with sorrow I embrace my fortune.
I have some rights of memory in this kingdom,
Which now to claim my vantage doth invite me.
HORATIO
Of that I shall have also cause to speak,
And from his mouth whose voice will draw on
more.
But let this same be presently performed
Even while men’s minds are wild, lest more
mischance
On plots and errors happen.
FORTINBRAS  Let four captains
Bear Hamlet like a soldier to the stage,
For he was likely, had he been put on,
To have proved most royal; and for his passage,
The soldier’s music and the rite of war
Speak loudly for him.
Take up the bodies. Such a sight as this
Becomes the field but here shows much amiss.
Go, bid the soldiers shoot.
They exit, marching, after the which, a peal of
ordnance are shot off.
 

Julius Caesar
 
ACT 1
 
Scene 1
Enter Flavius, Marullus, and certain Commoners,
including a Carpenter and a Cobbler, over the stage.
 
FLAVIUS
Hence! Home, you idle creatures, get you home!
Is this a holiday? What, know you not,
Being mechanical, you ought not walk
Upon a laboring day without the sign
Of your profession?—Speak, what trade art thou?
CARPENTER  Why, sir, a carpenter.
MARULLUS
Where is thy leather apron and thy rule?
What dost thou with thy best apparel on?—
You, sir, what trade are you?
COBBLER  Truly, sir, in respect of a fine workman, I am
but, as you would say, a cobbler.
MARULLUS
But what trade art thou? Answer me directly.
COBBLER  A trade, sir, that I hope I may use with a safe
conscience, which is indeed, sir, a mender of bad
soles.
FLAVIUS
What trade, thou knave? Thou naughty knave, what
trade?
COBBLER  Nay, I beseech you, sir, be not out with me.
Yet if you be out, sir, I can mend you.
MARULLUS
What mean’st thou by that? Mend me, thou saucy
fellow?
COBBLER  Why, sir, cobble you.
FLAVIUS  Thou art a cobbler, art thou?
COBBLER  Truly, sir, all that I live by is with the
awl. I meddle with no tradesman’s matters nor
women’s matters, but withal I am indeed, sir, a
surgeon to old shoes: when they are in great danger,
I recover them. As proper men as ever trod upon
neat’s leather have gone upon my handiwork.
FLAVIUS
But wherefore art not in thy shop today?
Why dost thou lead these men about the streets?
COBBLER  Truly, sir, to wear out their shoes, to
get myself into more work. But indeed, sir, we
make holiday to see Caesar and to rejoice in his
triumph.
MARULLUS
Wherefore rejoice? What conquest brings he home?
What tributaries follow him to Rome
To grace in captive bonds his chariot wheels?
You blocks, you stones, you worse than senseless
things!
O you hard hearts, you cruel men of Rome,
Knew you not Pompey? Many a time and oft
Have you climbed up to walls and battlements,
To towers and windows, yea, to chimney tops,
Your infants in your arms, and there have sat
The livelong day, with patient expectation,
To see great Pompey pass the streets of Rome.
And when you saw his chariot but appear,
Have you not made an universal shout,
That Tiber trembled underneath her banks
To hear the replication of your sounds
Made in her concave shores?
And do you now put on your best attire?
And do you now cull out a holiday?
And do you now strew flowers in his way
That comes in triumph over Pompey’s blood?
Be gone!
Run to your houses, fall upon your knees,
Pray to the gods to intermit the plague
That needs must light on this ingratitude.
FLAVIUS
Go, go, good countrymen, and for this fault
Assemble all the poor men of your sort,
Draw them to Tiber banks, and weep your tears
Into the channel, till the lowest stream
Do kiss the most exalted shores of all.
All the Commoners exit.
See whe’er their basest mettle be not moved.
They vanish tongue-tied in their guiltiness.
Go you down that way towards the Capitol.
This way will I. Disrobe the images
If you do find them decked with ceremonies.
MARULLUS  May we do so?
You know it is the feast of Lupercal.
FLAVIUS
It is no matter. Let no images
Be hung with Caesar’s trophies. I’ll about
And drive away the vulgar from the streets;
So do you too, where you perceive them thick.
These growing feathers plucked from Caesar’s wing
Will make him fly an ordinary pitch,
Who else would soar above the view of men
And keep us all in servile fearfulness.
They exit in different directions.
 
Scene 2
Enter Caesar, Antony for the course, Calphurnia, Portia,
Decius, Cicero, Brutus, Cassius, Casca, a Soothsayer;
after them Marullus and Flavius and Commoners.
 
CAESAR
Calphurnia.
CASCA  Peace, ho! Caesar speaks.
CAESAR  Calphurnia.
CALPHURNIA  Here, my lord.
CAESAR
Stand you directly in Antonius’ way
When he doth run his course.—Antonius.
ANTONY  Caesar, my lord.
CAESAR
Forget not in your speed, Antonius,
To touch Calphurnia, for our elders say
The barren, touchèd in this holy chase,
Shake off their sterile curse.
ANTONY  I shall remember.
When Caesar says “Do this,” it is performed.
CAESAR
Set on and leave no ceremony out.                                        	
Sennet.
SOOTHSAYER  Caesar.
CAESAR  Ha! Who calls?
CASCA
Bid every noise be still. Peace, yet again!
CAESAR
Who is it in the press that calls on me?
I hear a tongue shriller than all the music
Cry “Caesar.” Speak. Caesar is turned to hear.
SOOTHSAYER
Beware the ides of March.
CAESAR  What man is that?
BRUTUS
A soothsayer bids you beware the ides of March.
CAESAR
Set him before me. Let me see his face.
CASSIUS
Fellow, come from the throng.
The Soothsayer comes forward.
Look upon Caesar.
CAESAR
What sayst thou to me now? Speak once again.
SOOTHSAYER  Beware the ides of March.
CAESAR
He is a dreamer. Let us leave him. Pass.
Sennet. All but Brutus and Cassius exit.
CASSIUS
Will you go see the order of the course?
BRUTUS  Not I.
CASSIUS  I pray you, do.
BRUTUS
I am not gamesome. I do lack some part
Of that quick spirit that is in Antony.
Let me not hinder, Cassius, your desires.
I’ll leave you.
CASSIUS
Brutus, I do observe you now of late.
I have not from your eyes that gentleness
And show of love as I was wont to have.
You bear too stubborn and too strange a hand
Over your friend that loves you.
BRUTUS  Cassius,
Be not deceived. If I have veiled my look,
I turn the trouble of my countenance
Merely upon myself. Vexèd I am
Of late with passions of some difference,
Conceptions only proper to myself,
Which give some soil, perhaps, to my behaviors.
But let not therefore my good friends be grieved
(Among which number, Cassius, be you one)
Nor construe any further my neglect
Than that poor Brutus, with himself at war,
Forgets the shows of love to other men.
CASSIUS
Then, Brutus, I have much mistook your passion,
By means whereof this breast of mine hath buried
Thoughts of great value, worthy cogitations.
Tell me, good Brutus, can you see your face?
BRUTUS
No, Cassius, for the eye sees not itself
But by reflection, by some other things.
CASSIUS  ’Tis just.
And it is very much lamented, Brutus,
That you have no such mirrors as will turn
Your hidden worthiness into your eye,
That you might see your shadow. I have heard
Where many of the best respect in Rome,
Except immortal Caesar, speaking of Brutus
And groaning underneath this age’s yoke,
Have wished that noble Brutus had his eyes.
BRUTUS
Into what dangers would you lead me, Cassius,
That you would have me seek into myself
For that which is not in me?
CASSIUS
Therefore, good Brutus, be prepared to hear.
And since you know you cannot see yourself
So well as by reflection, I, your glass,
Will modestly discover to yourself
That of yourself which you yet know not of.
And be not jealous on me, gentle Brutus.
Were I a common laughter, or did use
To stale with ordinary oaths my love
To every new protester; if you know
That I do fawn on men and hug them hard
And after scandal them, or if you know
That I profess myself in banqueting
To all the rout, then hold me dangerous.
Flourish and shout.
BRUTUS
What means this shouting? I do fear the people
Choose Caesar for their king.
CASSIUS  Ay, do you fear it?
Then must I think you would not have it so.
BRUTUS
I would not, Cassius, yet I love him well.
But wherefore do you hold me here so long?
What is it that you would impart to me?
If it be aught toward the general good,
Set honor in one eye and death i’ th’ other
And I will look on both indifferently;
For let the gods so speed me as I love
The name of honor more than I fear death.
CASSIUS
I know that virtue to be in you, Brutus,
As well as I do know your outward favor.
Well, honor is the subject of my story.
I cannot tell what you and other men
Think of this life; but, for my single self,
I had as lief not be as live to be
In awe of such a thing as I myself.
I was born free as Caesar; so were you;
We both have fed as well, and we can both
Endure the winter’s cold as well as he.
For once, upon a raw and gusty day,
The troubled Tiber chafing with her shores,
Caesar said to me “Dar’st thou, Cassius, now
Leap in with me into this angry flood
And swim to yonder point?” Upon the word,
Accoutered as I was, I plungèd in
And bade him follow; so indeed he did.
The torrent roared, and we did buffet it
With lusty sinews, throwing it aside
And stemming it with hearts of controversy.
But ere we could arrive the point proposed,
Caesar cried “Help me, Cassius, or I sink!”
I, as Aeneas, our great ancestor,
Did from the flames of Troy upon his shoulder
The old Anchises bear, so from the waves of Tiber
Did I the tired Caesar. And this man
Is now become a god, and Cassius is
A wretched creature and must bend his body
If Caesar carelessly but nod on him.
He had a fever when he was in Spain,
And when the fit was on him, I did mark
How he did shake. ’Tis true, this god did shake.
His coward lips did from their color fly,
And that same eye whose bend doth awe the world
Did lose his luster. I did hear him groan.
Ay, and that tongue of his that bade the Romans
Mark him and write his speeches in their books,
“Alas,” it cried “Give me some drink, Titinius”
As a sick girl. You gods, it doth amaze me
A man of such a feeble temper should
So get the start of the majestic world
And bear the palm alone.
Shout. Flourish.
BRUTUS  Another general shout!
I do believe that these applauses are
For some new honors that are heaped on Caesar.
CASSIUS
Why, man, he doth bestride the narrow world
Like a Colossus, and we petty men
Walk under his huge legs and peep about
To find ourselves dishonorable graves.
Men at some time are masters of their fates.
The fault, dear Brutus, is not in our stars,
But in ourselves, that we are underlings.
“Brutus” and “Caesar”—what should be in that
“Caesar”?
Why should that name be sounded more than
yours?
Write them together, yours is as fair a name;
Sound them, it doth become the mouth as well;
Weigh them, it is as heavy; conjure with ’em,
“Brutus” will start a spirit as soon as “Caesar.”
Now, in the names of all the gods at once,
Upon what meat doth this our Caesar feed
That he is grown so great? Age, thou art shamed!
Rome, thou hast lost the breed of noble bloods!
When went there by an age, since the great flood,
But it was famed with more than with one man?
When could they say, till now, that talked of Rome,
That her wide walks encompassed but one man?
Now is it Rome indeed, and room enough
When there is in it but one only man.
O, you and I have heard our fathers say
There was a Brutus once that would have brooked
Th’ eternal devil to keep his state in Rome
As easily as a king.
BRUTUS
That you do love me, I am nothing jealous.
What you would work me to, I have some aim.
How I have thought of this, and of these times,
I shall recount hereafter. For this present,
I would not, so with love I might entreat you,
Be any further moved. What you have said
I will consider; what you have to say
I will with patience hear, and find a time
Both meet to hear and answer such high things.
Till then, my noble friend, chew upon this:
Brutus had rather be a villager
Than to repute himself a son of Rome
Under these hard conditions as this time
Is like to lay upon us.
CASSIUS  I am glad that my weak words
Have struck but thus much show of fire from
Brutus.
 
Enter Caesar and his train.
 
BRUTUS
The games are done, and Caesar is returning.
CASSIUS
As they pass by, pluck Casca by the sleeve,
And he will, after his sour fashion, tell you
What hath proceeded worthy note today.
BRUTUS
I will do so. But look you, Cassius,
The angry spot doth glow on Caesar’s brow,
And all the rest look like a chidden train.
Calphurnia’s cheek is pale, and Cicero
Looks with such ferret and such fiery eyes
As we have seen him in the Capitol,
Being crossed in conference by some senators.
CASSIUS
Casca will tell us what the matter is.
CAESAR  Antonius.
ANTONY  Caesar.
CAESAR
Let me have men about me that are fat,
Sleek-headed men, and such as sleep a-nights.
Yond Cassius has a lean and hungry look.
He thinks too much. Such men are dangerous.
ANTONY
Fear him not, Caesar; he’s not dangerous.
He is a noble Roman, and well given.
CAESAR
Would he were fatter! But I fear him not.
Yet if my name were liable to fear,
I do not know the man I should avoid
So soon as that spare Cassius. He reads much,
He is a great observer, and he looks
Quite through the deeds of men. He loves no plays,
As thou dost, Antony; he hears no music;
Seldom he smiles, and smiles in such a sort
As if he mocked himself and scorned his spirit
That could be moved to smile at anything.
Such men as he be never at heart’s ease
Whiles they behold a greater than themselves,
And therefore are they very dangerous.
I rather tell thee what is to be feared
Than what I fear; for always I am Caesar.
Come on my right hand, for this ear is deaf,
And tell me truly what thou think’st of him.
Sennet. Caesar and his train exit
but Casca remains behind.
CASCA  You pulled me by the cloak. Would you speak
with me?
BRUTUS
Ay, Casca. Tell us what hath chanced today
That Caesar looks so sad.
CASCA  Why, you were with him, were you not?
BRUTUS
I should not then ask Casca what had chanced.
CASCA  Why, there was a crown offered him; and, being
offered him, he put it by with the back of his hand,
thus, and then the people fell a-shouting.
BRUTUS  What was the second noise for?
CASCA  Why, for that too.
CASSIUS
They shouted thrice. What was the last cry for?
CASCA  Why, for that too.
BRUTUS  Was the crown offered him thrice?
CASCA  Ay, marry, was ’t, and he put it by thrice, every
time gentler than other; and at every putting-by,
mine honest neighbors shouted.
CASSIUS  Who offered him the crown?
CASCA  Why, Antony.
BRUTUS
Tell us the manner of it, gentle Casca.
CASCA  I can as well be hanged as tell the manner of it.
It was mere foolery; I did not mark it. I saw Mark
Antony offer him a crown (yet ’twas not a crown
neither; ’twas one of these coronets), and, as I told
you, he put it by once; but for all that, to my
thinking, he would fain have had it. Then he offered
it to him again; then he put it by again; but to my
thinking, he was very loath to lay his fingers off it.
And then he offered it the third time. He put it the
third time by, and still as he refused it the rabblement
hooted and clapped their chopped hands and
threw up their sweaty nightcaps and uttered such a
deal of stinking breath because Caesar refused the
crown that it had almost choked Caesar, for he
swooned and fell down at it. And for mine own part,
I durst not laugh for fear of opening my lips and
receiving the bad air.
CASSIUS
But soft, I pray you. What, did Caesar swoon?
CASCA  He fell down in the marketplace and foamed at
mouth and was speechless.
BRUTUS
’Tis very like; he hath the falling sickness.
CASSIUS
No, Caesar hath it not; but you and I
And honest Casca, we have the falling sickness.
CASCA  I know not what you mean by that, but I am
sure Caesar fell down. If the tag-rag people did not
clap him and hiss him, according as he pleased and
displeased them, as they use to do the players in the
theater, I am no true man.
BRUTUS
What said he when he came unto himself?
CASCA  Marry, before he fell down, when he perceived
the common herd was glad he refused the crown,
he plucked me ope his doublet and offered them his
throat to cut. An I had been a man of any occupation,
if I would not have taken him at a word, I
would I might go to hell among the rogues. And so
he fell. When he came to himself again, he said if he
had done or said anything amiss, he desired their
Worships to think it was his infirmity. Three or four
wenches where I stood cried “Alas, good soul!” and
forgave him with all their hearts. But there’s no
heed to be taken of them; if Caesar had stabbed
their mothers, they would have done no less.
BRUTUS
And, after that, he came thus sad away?
CASCA  Ay.
CASSIUS  Did Cicero say anything?
CASCA  Ay, he spoke Greek.
CASSIUS  To what effect?
CASCA  Nay, an I tell you that, I’ll ne’er look you i’ th’
face again. But those that understood him smiled at
one another and shook their heads. But for mine
own part, it was Greek to me. I could tell you more
news too: Marullus and Flavius, for pulling scarves
off Caesar’s images, are put to silence. Fare you
well. There was more foolery yet, if I could remember
it.
CASSIUS  Will you sup with me tonight, Casca?
CASCA  No, I am promised forth.
CASSIUS  Will you dine with me tomorrow?
CASCA  Ay, if I be alive, and your mind hold, and your
dinner worth the eating.
CASSIUS  Good. I will expect you.
CASCA  Do so. Farewell both.                                                	
He exits.
BRUTUS
What a blunt fellow is this grown to be!
He was quick mettle when he went to school.
CASSIUS
So is he now in execution
Of any bold or noble enterprise,
However he puts on this tardy form.
This rudeness is a sauce to his good wit,
Which gives men stomach to digest his words
With better appetite.
BRUTUS
And so it is. For this time I will leave you.
Tomorrow, if you please to speak with me,
I will come home to you; or, if you will,
Come home to me, and I will wait for you.
CASSIUS
I will do so. Till then, think of the world.
Brutus exits.
Well, Brutus, thou art noble. Yet I see
Thy honorable mettle may be wrought
From that it is disposed. Therefore it is meet
That noble minds keep ever with their likes;
For who so firm that cannot be seduced?
Caesar doth bear me hard, but he loves Brutus.
If I were Brutus now, and he were Cassius,
He should not humor me. I will this night
In several hands in at his windows throw,
As if they came from several citizens,
Writings, all tending to the great opinion
That Rome holds of his name, wherein obscurely
Caesar’s ambition shall be glancèd at
And after this, let Caesar seat him sure,
For we will shake him, or worse days endure.
He exits.
 
Scene 3
Thunder and lightning. Enter Casca and Cicero.
 
CICERO
Good even, Casca. Brought you Caesar home?
Why are you breathless? And why stare you so?
CASCA
Are not you moved, when all the sway of earth
Shakes like a thing unfirm? O Cicero,
I have seen tempests when the scolding winds
Have rived the knotty oaks, and I have seen
Th’ ambitious ocean swell and rage and foam
To be exalted with the threat’ning clouds;
But never till tonight, never till now,
Did I go through a tempest dropping fire.
Either there is a civil strife in heaven,
Or else the world, too saucy with the gods,
Incenses them to send destruction.
CICERO
Why, saw you anything more wonderful?
CASCA
A common slave (you know him well by sight)
Held up his left hand, which did flame and burn
Like twenty torches joined; and yet his hand,
Not sensible of fire, remained unscorched.
Besides (I ha’ not since put up my sword),
Against the Capitol I met a lion,
Who glazed upon me and went surly by
Without annoying me. And there were drawn
Upon a heap a hundred ghastly women,
Transformèd with their fear, who swore they saw
Men all in fire walk up and down the streets.
And yesterday the bird of night did sit
Even at noonday upon the marketplace,
Hooting and shrieking. When these prodigies
Do so conjointly meet, let not men say
“These are their reasons, they are natural,”
For I believe they are portentous things
Unto the climate that they point upon.
CICERO
Indeed, it is a strange-disposèd time.
But men may construe things after their fashion,
Clean from the purpose of the things themselves.
Comes Caesar to the Capitol tomorrow?
CASCA
He doth, for he did bid Antonius
Send word to you he would be there tomorrow.
CICERO
Good night then, Casca. This disturbèd sky
Is not to walk in.
CASCA  Farewell, Cicero                                                 	
Cicero exits.
 
Enter Cassius.
 
CASSIUS
Who’s there?
CASCA  A Roman.
CASSIUS  Casca, by your voice.
CASCA
Your ear is good. Cassius, what night is this!
CASSIUS
A very pleasing night to honest men.
CASCA
Who ever knew the heavens menace so?
CASSIUS
Those that have known the Earth so full of faults.
For my part, I have walked about the streets,
Submitting me unto the perilous night,
And thus unbracèd, Casca, as you see,
Have bared my bosom to the thunder-stone;
And when the cross blue lightning seemed to open
The breast of heaven, I did present myself
Even in the aim and very flash of it.
CASCA
But wherefore did you so much tempt the heavens?
It is the part of men to fear and tremble
When the most mighty gods by tokens send
Such dreadful heralds to astonish us.
CASSIUS
You are dull, Casca, and those sparks of life
That should be in a Roman you do want,
Or else you use not. You look pale, and gaze,
And put on fear, and cast yourself in wonder,
To see the strange impatience of the heavens.
But if you would consider the true cause
Why all these fires, why all these gliding ghosts,
Why birds and beasts from quality and kind,
Why old men, fools, and children calculate,
Why all these things change from their ordinance,
Their natures, and preformèd faculties,
To monstrous quality—why, you shall find
That heaven hath infused them with these spirits
To make them instruments of fear and warning
Unto some monstrous state.
Now could I, Casca, name to thee a man
Most like this dreadful night,
That thunders, lightens, opens graves, and roars
As doth the lion in the Capitol;
A man no mightier than thyself or me
In personal action, yet prodigious grown,
And fearful, as these strange eruptions are.
CASCA
’Tis Caesar that you mean, is it not, Cassius?
CASSIUS
Let it be who it is. For Romans now
Have thews and limbs like to their ancestors.
But, woe the while, our fathers’ minds are dead,
And we are governed with our mothers’ spirits.
Our yoke and sufferance show us womanish.
CASCA
Indeed, they say the Senators tomorrow
Mean to establish Caesar as a king,
And he shall wear his crown by sea and land
In every place save here in Italy.
CASSIUS
I know where I will wear this dagger then;
Cassius from bondage will deliver Cassius.
Therein, you gods, you make the weak most strong;
Therein, you gods, you tyrants do defeat.
Nor stony tower, nor walls of beaten brass,
Nor airless dungeon, nor strong links of iron,
Can be retentive to the strength of spirit;
But life, being weary of these worldly bars,
Never lacks power to dismiss itself.
If I know this, know all the world besides,
That part of tyranny that I do bear
I can shake off at pleasure.                                           	
Thunder still.
CASCA  So can I.
So every bondman in his own hand bears
The power to cancel his captivity.
CASSIUS
And why should Caesar be a tyrant, then?
Poor man, I know he would not be a wolf
But that he sees the Romans are but sheep;
He were no lion, were not Romans hinds.
Those that with haste will make a mighty fire
Begin it with weak straws. What trash is Rome,
What rubbish, and what offal when it serves
For the base matter to illuminate
So vile a thing as Caesar! But, O grief,
Where hast thou led me? I perhaps speak this
Before a willing bondman; then, I know
My answer must be made. But I am armed,
And dangers are to me indifferent.
CASCA
You speak to Casca, and to such a man
That is no fleering telltale. Hold. My hand.
They shake hands.
Be factious for redress of all these griefs,
And I will set this foot of mine as far
As who goes farthest.
CASSIUS  There’s a bargain made.
Now know you, Casca, I have moved already
Some certain of the noblest-minded Romans
To undergo with me an enterprise
Of honorable-dangerous consequence.
And I do know by this they stay for me
In Pompey’s Porch. For now, this fearful night,
There is no stir or walking in the streets;
And the complexion of the element
In favor ’s like the work we have in hand,
Most bloody, fiery, and most terrible.
 
Enter Cinna.
 
CASCA
Stand close awhile, for here comes one in haste.
CASSIUS
’Tis Cinna; I do know him by his gait.
He is a friend.—Cinna, where haste you so?
CINNA
To find out you. Who’s that? Metellus Cimber?
CASSIUS
No, it is Casca, one incorporate
To our attempts. Am I not stayed for, Cinna?
CINNA
I am glad on ’t. What a fearful night is this!
There’s two or three of us have seen strange sights.
CASSIUS  Am I not stayed for? Tell me.
CINNA
Yes, you are. O Cassius, if you could
But win the noble Brutus to our party—
CASSIUS, handing him papers
Be you content. Good Cinna, take this paper,
And look you lay it in the Praetor’s chair,
Where Brutus may but find it; and throw this
In at his window; set this up with wax
Upon old Brutus’ statue. All this done,
Repair to Pompey’s Porch, where you shall find us.
Is Decius Brutus and Trebonius there?
CINNA
All but Metellus Cimber, and he’s gone
To seek you at your house. Well, I will hie
And so bestow these papers as you bade me.
CASSIUS
That done, repair to Pompey’s Theater.
Cinna exits.
Come, Casca, you and I will yet ere day
See Brutus at his house. Three parts of him
Is ours already, and the man entire
Upon the next encounter yields him ours.
CASCA
O, he sits high in all the people’s hearts,
And that which would appear offense in us
His countenance, like richest alchemy,
Will change to virtue and to worthiness.
CASSIUS
Him and his worth and our great need of him
You have right well conceited. Let us go,
For it is after midnight, and ere day
We will awake him and be sure of him.
They exit.
 
 
 

 
 
ACT 2
 
Scene 1
Enter Brutus in his orchard.
 
BRUTUS  What, Lucius, ho!—
I cannot by the progress of the stars
Give guess how near to day.—Lucius, I say!—
I would it were my fault to sleep so soundly.—
When, Lucius, when? Awake, I say! What, Lucius!
 
Enter Lucius.
 
LUCIUS  Called you, my lord?
BRUTUS
Get me a taper in my study, Lucius.
When it is lighted, come and call me here.
LUCIUS  I will, my lord.                                                         	
He exits.
BRUTUS
It must be by his death. And for my part
I know no personal cause to spurn at him,
But for the general. He would be crowned:
How that might change his nature, there’s the
question.
It is the bright day that brings forth the adder,
And that craves wary walking. Crown him that,
And then I grant we put a sting in him
That at his will he may do danger with.
Th’ abuse of greatness is when it disjoins
Remorse from power. And, to speak truth of Caesar,
I have not known when his affections swayed
More than his reason. But ’tis a common proof
That lowliness is young ambition’s ladder,
Whereto the climber-upward turns his face;
But, when he once attains the upmost round,
He then unto the ladder turns his back,
Looks in the clouds, scorning the base degrees
By which he did ascend. So Caesar may.
Then, lest he may, prevent. And since the quarrel
Will bear no color for the thing he is,
Fashion it thus: that what he is, augmented,
Would run to these and these extremities.
And therefore think him as a serpent’s egg,
Which, hatched, would, as his kind, grow
mischievous,
And kill him in the shell.
 
Enter Lucius.
 
LUCIUS
The taper burneth in your closet, sir.
Searching the window for a flint, I found
This paper, thus sealed up, and I am sure
It did not lie there when I went to bed.
Gives him the letter.
BRUTUS
Get you to bed again. It is not day.
Is not tomorrow, boy, the ides of March?
LUCIUS  I know not, sir.
BRUTUS
Look in the calendar, and bring me word.
LUCIUS  I will, sir.                                                                  	
He exits.
BRUTUS
The exhalations, whizzing in the air,
Give so much light that I may read by them.
Opens the letter and reads.
 
Brutus, thou sleep’st. Awake, and see thyself!
Shall Rome, etc. Speak, strike, redress!
“Brutus, thou sleep’st. Awake.”
Such instigations have been often dropped
Where I have took them up.
“Shall Rome, etc.” Thus must I piece it out:
Shall Rome stand under one man’s awe? What,
Rome?
My ancestors did from the streets of Rome
The Tarquin drive when he was called a king.
“Speak, strike, redress!” Am I entreated
To speak and strike? O Rome, I make thee promise,
If the redress will follow, thou receivest
Thy full petition at the hand of Brutus.
 
Enter Lucius.
 
LUCIUS  Sir, March is wasted fifteen days.
Knock within.
BRUTUS
’Tis good. Go to the gate; somebody knocks.
Lucius exits.
Since Cassius first did whet me against Caesar,
I have not slept.
Between the acting of a dreadful thing
And the first motion, all the interim is
Like a phantasma or a hideous dream.
The genius and the mortal instruments
Are then in council, and the state of man,
Like to a little kingdom, suffers then
The nature of an insurrection.
 
Enter Lucius.
 
LUCIUS
Sir, ’tis your brother Cassius at the door,
Who doth desire to see you.
BRUTUS  Is he alone?
LUCIUS
No, sir. There are more with him.
BRUTUS  Do you know
them?
LUCIUS
No, sir. Their hats are plucked about their ears,
And half their faces buried in their cloaks,
That by no means I may discover them
By any mark of favor.
BRUTUS  Let ’em enter.                                                   	
Lucius exits.
They are the faction. O conspiracy,
Sham’st thou to show thy dang’rous brow by night,
When evils are most free? O, then, by day
Where wilt thou find a cavern dark enough
To mask thy monstrous visage? Seek none,
conspiracy.
Hide it in smiles and affability;
For if thou path, thy native semblance on,
Not Erebus itself were dim enough
To hide thee from prevention.
 
Enter the conspirators, Cassius, Casca, Decius, Cinna,
Metellus, and Trebonius.
 
CASSIUS
I think we are too bold upon your rest.
Good morrow, Brutus. Do we trouble you?
BRUTUS
I have been up this hour, awake all night.
Know I these men that come along with you?
CASSIUS
Yes, every man of them; and no man here
But honors you, and every one doth wish
You had but that opinion of yourself
Which every noble Roman bears of you.
This is Trebonius.
BRUTUS  He is welcome hither.
CASSIUS
This, Decius Brutus.
BRUTUS  He is welcome too.
CASSIUS
This, Casca; this, Cinna; and this, Metellus Cimber.
BRUTUS  They are all welcome.
What watchful cares do interpose themselves
Betwixt your eyes and night?
CASSIUS  Shall I entreat a word?
Brutus and Cassius whisper.
DECIUS
Here lies the east; doth not the day break here?
CASCA  No.
CINNA
O pardon, sir, it doth; and yon gray lines
That fret the clouds are messengers of day.
CASCA
You shall confess that you are both deceived.
Here, as I point my sword, the sun arises,
Which is a great way growing on the south,
Weighing the youthful season of the year.
Some two months hence, up higher toward the
north
He first presents his fire, and the high east
Stands, as the Capitol, directly here.
BRUTUS, coming forward with Cassius
Give me your hands all over, one by one.
CASSIUS
And let us swear our resolution.
BRUTUS
No, not an oath. If not the face of men,
The sufferance of our souls, the time’s abuse—
If these be motives weak, break off betimes,
And every man hence to his idle bed.
So let high-sighted tyranny range on
Till each man drop by lottery. But if these—
As I am sure they do—bear fire enough
To kindle cowards and to steel with valor
The melting spirits of women, then, countrymen,
What need we any spur but our own cause
To prick us to redress? What other bond
Than secret Romans that have spoke the word
And will not palter? And what other oath
Than honesty to honesty engaged
That this shall be or we will fall for it?
Swear priests and cowards and men cautelous,
Old feeble carrions, and such suffering souls
That welcome wrongs; unto bad causes swear
Such creatures as men doubt; but do not stain
The even virtue of our enterprise,
Nor th’ insuppressive mettle of our spirits,
To think that or our cause or our performance
Did need an oath, when every drop of blood
That every Roman bears, and nobly bears,
Is guilty of a several bastardy
If he do break the smallest particle
Of any promise that hath passed from him.
CASSIUS
But what of Cicero? Shall we sound him?
I think he will stand very strong with us.
CASCA
Let us not leave him out.
CINNA  No, by no means.
METELLUS
O, let us have him, for his silver hairs
Will purchase us a good opinion
And buy men’s voices to commend our deeds.
It shall be said his judgment ruled our hands.
Our youths and wildness shall no whit appear,
But all be buried in his gravity.
BRUTUS
O, name him not! Let us not break with him,
For he will never follow anything
That other men begin.
CASSIUS  Then leave him out.
CASCA  Indeed, he is not fit.
DECIUS
Shall no man else be touched, but only Caesar?
CASSIUS
Decius, well urged. I think it is not meet
Mark Antony, so well beloved of Caesar,
Should outlive Caesar. We shall find of him
A shrewd contriver; and, you know, his means,
If he improve them, may well stretch so far
As to annoy us all; which to prevent,
Let Antony and Caesar fall together.
BRUTUS
Our course will seem too bloody, Caius Cassius,
To cut the head off and then hack the limbs,
Like wrath in death and envy afterwards;
For Antony is but a limb of Caesar.
Let’s be sacrificers, but not butchers, Caius.
We all stand up against the spirit of Caesar,
And in the spirit of men there is no blood.
O, that we then could come by Caesar’s spirit
And not dismember Caesar! But, alas,
Caesar must bleed for it. And, gentle friends,
Let’s kill him boldly, but not wrathfully.
Let’s carve him as a dish fit for the gods,
Not hew him as a carcass fit for hounds.
And let our hearts, as subtle masters do,
Stir up their servants to an act of rage
And after seem to chide ’em. This shall make
Our purpose necessary and not envious;
Which so appearing to the common eyes,
We shall be called purgers, not murderers.
And for Mark Antony, think not of him,
For he can do no more than Caesar’s arm
When Caesar’s head is off.
CASSIUS  Yet I fear him,
For in the engrafted love he bears to Caesar—
BRUTUS
Alas, good Cassius, do not think of him.
If he love Caesar, all that he can do
Is to himself: take thought and die for Caesar.
And that were much he should, for he is given
To sports, to wildness, and much company.
TREBONIUS
There is no fear in him. Let him not die,
For he will live and laugh at this hereafter.
Clock strikes.
BRUTUS
Peace, count the clock.
CASSIUS  The clock hath stricken
three.
TREBONIUS
’Tis time to part.
CASSIUS  But it is doubtful yet
Whether Caesar will come forth today or no,
For he is superstitious grown of late,
Quite from the main opinion he held once
Of fantasy, of dreams, and ceremonies.
It may be these apparent prodigies,
The unaccustomed terror of this night,
And the persuasion of his augurers
May hold him from the Capitol today.
DECIUS
Never fear that. If he be so resolved,
I can o’ersway him, for he loves to hear
That unicorns may be betrayed with trees,
And bears with glasses, elephants with holes,
Lions with toils, and men with flatterers.
But when I tell him he hates flatterers,
He says he does, being then most flatterèd.
Let me work,
For I can give his humor the true bent,
And I will bring him to the Capitol.
CASSIUS
Nay, we will all of us be there to fetch him.
BRUTUS
By the eighth hour, is that the uttermost?
CINNA
Be that the uttermost, and fail not then.
METELLUS
Caius Ligarius doth bear Caesar hard,
Who rated him for speaking well of Pompey.
I wonder none of you have thought of him.
BRUTUS
Now, good Metellus, go along by him.
He loves me well, and I have given him reasons.
Send him but hither, and I’ll fashion him.
CASSIUS
The morning comes upon ’s. We’ll leave you,
Brutus.
And, friends, disperse yourselves, but all remember
What you have said, and show yourselves true
Romans.
BRUTUS
Good gentlemen, look fresh and merrily.
Let not our looks put on our purposes,
But bear it, as our Roman actors do,
With untired spirits and formal constancy.
And so good morrow to you every one.
All but Brutus exit.
Boy! Lucius!—Fast asleep? It is no matter.
Enjoy the honey-heavy dew of slumber.
Thou hast no figures nor no fantasies
Which busy care draws in the brains of men.
Therefore thou sleep’st so sound.
 
Enter Portia.
 
PORTIA  Brutus, my lord.
BRUTUS
Portia! What mean you? Wherefore rise you now?
It is not for your health thus to commit
Your weak condition to the raw cold morning.
PORTIA
Nor for yours neither. You’ve ungently, Brutus,
Stole from my bed. And yesternight at supper
You suddenly arose and walked about,
Musing and sighing, with your arms across,
And when I asked you what the matter was,
You stared upon me with ungentle looks.
I urged you further; then you scratched your head
And too impatiently stamped with your foot.
Yet I insisted; yet you answered not,
But with an angry wafture of your hand
Gave sign for me to leave you. So I did,
Fearing to strengthen that impatience
Which seemed too much enkindled, and withal
Hoping it was but an effect of humor,
Which sometime hath his hour with every man.
It will not let you eat nor talk nor sleep,
And could it work so much upon your shape
As it hath much prevailed on your condition,
I should not know you Brutus. Dear my lord,
Make me acquainted with your cause of grief.
BRUTUS
I am not well in health, and that is all.
PORTIA
Brutus is wise and, were he not in health,
He would embrace the means to come by it.
BRUTUS
Why so I do. Good Portia, go to bed.
PORTIA
Is Brutus sick? And is it physical
To walk unbracèd and suck up the humors
Of the dank morning? What, is Brutus sick,
And will he steal out of his wholesome bed
To dare the vile contagion of the night
And tempt the rheumy and unpurgèd air
To add unto his sickness? No, my Brutus,
You have some sick offense within your mind,
Which by the right and virtue of my place
I ought to know of. She kneels. And upon my
knees
I charm you, by my once commended beauty,
By all your vows of love, and that great vow
Which did incorporate and make us one,
That you unfold to me, your self, your half,
Why you are heavy, and what men tonight
Have had resort to you; for here have been
Some six or seven who did hide their faces
Even from darkness.
BRUTUS  Kneel not, gentle Portia.
He lifts her up.
PORTIA
I should not need, if you were gentle Brutus.
Within the bond of marriage, tell me, Brutus,
Is it excepted I should know no secrets
That appertain to you? Am I your self
But, as it were, in sort or limitation,
To keep with you at meals, comfort your bed,
And talk to you sometimes? Dwell I but in the
suburbs
Of your good pleasure? If it be no more,
Portia is Brutus’ harlot, not his wife.
BRUTUS
You are my true and honorable wife,
As dear to me as are the ruddy drops
That visit my sad heart.
PORTIA
If this were true, then should I know this secret.
I grant I am a woman, but withal
A woman that Lord Brutus took to wife.
I grant I am a woman, but withal
A woman well-reputed, Cato’s daughter.
Think you I am no stronger than my sex,
Being so fathered and so husbanded?
Tell me your counsels; I will not disclose ’em.
I have made strong proof of my constancy,
Giving myself a voluntary wound
Here, in the thigh. Can I bear that with patience,
And not my husband’s secrets?
BRUTUS  O you gods,
Render me worthy of this noble wife!                                    	
Knock.
Hark, hark, one knocks. Portia, go in awhile,
And by and by thy bosom shall partake
The secrets of my heart.
All my engagements I will construe to thee,
All the charactery of my sad brows.
Leave me with haste.                                                      	
Portia exits.
Lucius, who ’s that knocks?
 
Enter Lucius and Ligarius.
 
LUCIUS
Here is a sick man that would speak with you.
BRUTUS
Caius Ligarius, that Metellus spoke of.—
Boy, stand aside.                                                             	
Lucius exits.
Caius Ligarius, how?
LIGARIUS
Vouchsafe good morrow from a feeble tongue.
BRUTUS
O, what a time have you chose out, brave Caius,
To wear a kerchief! Would you were not sick!
LIGARIUS
I am not sick, if Brutus have in hand
Any exploit worthy the name of honor.
BRUTUS
Such an exploit have I in hand, Ligarius,
Had you a healthful ear to hear of it.
LIGARIUS
By all the gods that Romans bow before,
I here discard my sickness.
He takes off his kerchief.
Soul of Rome,
Brave son derived from honorable loins,
Thou like an exorcist hast conjured up
My mortifièd spirit. Now bid me run,
And I will strive with things impossible,
Yea, get the better of them. What’s to do?
BRUTUS
A piece of work that will make sick men whole.
LIGARIUS
But are not some whole that we must make sick?
BRUTUS
That must we also. What it is, my Caius,
I shall unfold to thee as we are going
To whom it must be done.
LIGARIUS  Set on your foot,
And with a heart new-fired I follow you
To do I know not what; but it sufficeth
That Brutus leads me on.                                                     	
Thunder.
BRUTUS  Follow me then.
They exit.
 
Scene 2
Thunder and lightning. Enter Julius Caesar in his
nightgown.
 
CAESAR
Nor heaven nor Earth have been at peace tonight.
Thrice hath Calphurnia in her sleep cried out
“Help ho, they murder Caesar!”—Who’s within?
 
Enter a Servant.
 
SERVANT  My lord.
CAESAR
Go bid the priests do present sacrifice,
And bring me their opinions of success.
SERVANT  I will, my lord.                                                     	
He exits.
 
Enter Calphurnia.
 
CALPHURNIA
What mean you, Caesar? Think you to walk forth?
You shall not stir out of your house today.
CAESAR
Caesar shall forth. The things that threatened me
Ne’er looked but on my back. When they shall see
The face of Caesar, they are vanishèd.
CALPHURNIA
Caesar, I never stood on ceremonies,
Yet now they fright me. There is one within,
Besides the things that we have heard and seen,
Recounts most horrid sights seen by the watch.
A lioness hath whelpèd in the streets,
And graves have yawned and yielded up their dead.
Fierce fiery warriors fought upon the clouds
In ranks and squadrons and right form of war,
Which drizzled blood upon the Capitol.
The noise of battle hurtled in the air,
Horses did neigh, and dying men did groan,
And ghosts did shriek and squeal about the streets.
O Caesar, these things are beyond all use,
And I do fear them.
CAESAR  What can be avoided
Whose end is purposed by the mighty gods?
Yet Caesar shall go forth, for these predictions
Are to the world in general as to Caesar.
CALPHURNIA
When beggars die there are no comets seen;
The heavens themselves blaze forth the death of
princes.
CAESAR
Cowards die many times before their deaths;
The valiant never taste of death but once.
Of all the wonders that I yet have heard,
It seems to me most strange that men should fear,
Seeing that death, a necessary end,
Will come when it will come.
 
Enter a Servant.
 
What say the augurers?
SERVANT
They would not have you to stir forth today.
Plucking the entrails of an offering forth,
They could not find a heart within the beast.
CAESAR
The gods do this in shame of cowardice.
Caesar should be a beast without a heart
If he should stay at home today for fear.
No, Caesar shall not. Danger knows full well
That Caesar is more dangerous than he.
We are two lions littered in one day,
And I the elder and more terrible.
And Caesar shall go forth.
CALPHURNIA  Alas, my lord,
Your wisdom is consumed in confidence.
Do not go forth today. Call it my fear
That keeps you in the house, and not your own.
We’ll send Mark Antony to the Senate House,
And he shall say you are not well today.
Let me, upon my knee, prevail in this.                            	
She kneels.
CAESAR
Mark Antony shall say I am not well,
And for thy humor I will stay at home.
He lifts her up.
 
Enter Decius.
 
Here’s Decius Brutus; he shall tell them so.
DECIUS
Caesar, all hail! Good morrow, worthy Caesar.
I come to fetch you to the Senate House.
CAESAR
And you are come in very happy time
To bear my greeting to the Senators
And tell them that I will not come today.
Cannot is false, and that I dare not, falser.
I will not come today. Tell them so, Decius.
CALPHURNIA
Say he is sick.
CAESAR  Shall Caesar send a lie?
Have I in conquest stretched mine arm so far,
To be afeard to tell graybeards the truth?
Decius, go tell them Caesar will not come.
DECIUS
Most mighty Caesar, let me know some cause,
Lest I be laughed at when I tell them so.
CAESAR
The cause is in my will. I will not come.
That is enough to satisfy the Senate.
But for your private satisfaction,
Because I love you, I will let you know.
Calphurnia here, my wife, stays me at home.
She dreamt tonight she saw my statue,
Which, like a fountain with an hundred spouts,
Did run pure blood; and many lusty Romans
Came smiling and did bathe their hands in it.
And these does she apply for warnings and portents
And evils imminent, and on her knee
Hath begged that I will stay at home today.
DECIUS
This dream is all amiss interpreted.
It was a vision fair and fortunate.
Your statue spouting blood in many pipes,
In which so many smiling Romans bathed,
Signifies that from you great Rome shall suck
Reviving blood, and that great men shall press
For tinctures, stains, relics, and cognizance.
This by Calphurnia’s dream is signified.
CAESAR
And this way have you well expounded it.
DECIUS
I have, when you have heard what I can say.
And know it now: the Senate have concluded
To give this day a crown to mighty Caesar.
If you shall send them word you will not come,
Their minds may change. Besides, it were a mock
Apt to be rendered, for someone to say
“Break up the Senate till another time,
When Caesar’s wife shall meet with better dreams.”
If Caesar hide himself, shall they not whisper
“Lo, Caesar is afraid”?
Pardon me, Caesar, for my dear dear love
To your proceeding bids me tell you this,
And reason to my love is liable.
CAESAR
How foolish do your fears seem now, Calphurnia!
I am ashamèd I did yield to them.
Give me my robe, for I will go.
 
Enter Brutus, Ligarius, Metellus, Casca, Trebonius,
Cinna, and Publius.
 
And look where Publius is come to fetch me.
PUBLIUS
Good morrow, Caesar.
CAESAR  Welcome, Publius.—
What, Brutus, are you stirred so early too?—
Good morrow, Casca.—Caius Ligarius,
Caesar was ne’er so much your enemy
As that same ague which hath made you lean.—
What is ’t o’clock?
BRUTUS  Caesar, ’tis strucken eight.
CAESAR
I thank you for your pains and courtesy.
 
Enter Antony.
 
See, Antony that revels long a-nights
Is notwithstanding up.—Good morrow, Antony.
ANTONY  So to most noble Caesar.
CAESAR, to Servant  Bid them prepare within.—
I am to blame to be thus waited for.                            	
Servant exits.
Now, Cinna.—Now, Metellus.—What, Trebonius,
I have an hour’s talk in store for you.
Remember that you call on me today;
Be near me that I may remember you.
TREBONIUS
Caesar, I will. Aside. And so near will I be
That your best friends shall wish I had been further.
CAESAR
Good friends, go in and taste some wine with me,
And we, like friends, will straightway go together.
BRUTUS, aside
That every like is not the same, O Caesar,
The heart of Brutus earns to think upon.
They exit.
 
Scene 3
Enter Artemidorus reading a paper.
 
ARTEMIDORUS  Caesar, beware of Brutus, take heed of
Cassius, come not near Casca, have an eye to Cinna,
trust not Trebonius, mark well Metellus Cimber.
Decius Brutus loves thee not. Thou hast wronged
Caius Ligarius. There is but one mind in all these
men, and it is bent against Caesar. If thou beest not
immortal, look about you. Security gives way to
conspiracy. The mighty gods defend thee!
                                                                                          	
Thy lover,
Artemidorus
Here will I stand till Caesar pass along,
And as a suitor will I give him this.
My heart laments that virtue cannot live
Out of the teeth of emulation.
If thou read this, O Caesar, thou mayest live;
If not, the Fates with traitors do contrive.
He exits.
 
Scene 4
Enter Portia and Lucius.
 
PORTIA
I prithee, boy, run to the Senate House.
Stay not to answer me, but get thee gone.
Why dost thou stay?
LUCIUS  To know my errand, madam.
PORTIA
I would have had thee there and here again
Ere I can tell thee what thou shouldst do there.
Aside. O constancy, be strong upon my side;
Set a huge mountain ’tween my heart and tongue.
I have a man’s mind but a woman’s might.
How hard it is for women to keep counsel!—
Art thou here yet?
LUCIUS  Madam, what should I do?
Run to the Capitol, and nothing else?
And so return to you, and nothing else?
PORTIA
Yes, bring me word, boy, if thy lord look well,
For he went sickly forth. And take good note
What Caesar doth, what suitors press to him.
Hark, boy, what noise is that?
LUCIUS  I hear none, madam.
PORTIA  Prithee, listen well.
I heard a bustling rumor like a fray,
And the wind brings it from the Capitol.
LUCIUS  Sooth, madam, I hear nothing.
 
Enter the Soothsayer.
 
PORTIA
Come hither, fellow. Which way hast thou been?
SOOTHSAYER  At mine own house, good lady.
PORTIA  What is ’t o’clock?
SOOTHSAYER  About the ninth hour, lady.
PORTIA
Is Caesar yet gone to the Capitol?
SOOTHSAYER
Madam, not yet. I go to take my stand
To see him pass on to the Capitol.
PORTIA
Thou hast some suit to Caesar, hast thou not?
SOOTHSAYER
That I have, lady. If it will please Caesar
To be so good to Caesar as to hear me,
I shall beseech him to befriend himself.
PORTIA
Why, know’st thou any harms intended towards
him?
SOOTHSAYER
None that I know will be, much that I fear may
chance.
Good morrow to you.—Here the street is narrow.
The throng that follows Caesar at the heels,
Of senators, of praetors, common suitors,
Will crowd a feeble man almost to death.
I’ll get me to a place more void, and there
Speak to great Caesar as he comes along.                           	
He exits.
PORTIA
I must go in. Aside. Ay me, how weak a thing
The heart of woman is! O Brutus,
The heavens speed thee in thine enterprise!
Sure the boy heard me. To Lucius. Brutus hath a
suit
That Caesar will not grant. Aside. O, I grow
faint.—
Run, Lucius, and commend me to my lord.
Say I am merry. Come to me again
And bring me word what he doth say to thee.
They exit separately.
 
 
 

 
 
ACT 3
 
Scene 1
Flourish. Enter Caesar, Antony, Lepidus; Brutus, Cassius,
Casca, Decius, Metellus, Trebonius, Cinna; Publius,
Popilius, Artemidorus, the Soothsayer, and other
Senators and Petitioners.
 
CAESAR  The ides of March are come.
SOOTHSAYER  Ay, Caesar, but not gone.
ARTEMIDORUS  Hail, Caesar. Read this schedule.
DECIUS
Trebonius doth desire you to o’erread,
At your best leisure, this his humble suit.
ARTEMIDORUS
O Caesar, read mine first, for mine’s a suit
That touches Caesar nearer. Read it, great Caesar.
CAESAR
What touches us ourself shall be last served.
ARTEMIDORUS
Delay not, Caesar; read it instantly.
CAESAR
What, is the fellow mad?
PUBLIUS  Sirrah, give place.
CASSIUS
What, urge you your petitions in the street?
Come to the Capitol.
Caesar goes forward, the rest following.
POPILIUS, to Cassius
I wish your enterprise today may thrive.
CASSIUS  What enterprise, Popilius?
POPILIUS  Fare you well.                                            	
He walks away.
BRUTUS  What said Popilius Lena?
CASSIUS
He wished today our enterprise might thrive.
I fear our purpose is discoverèd.
BRUTUS
Look how he makes to Caesar. Mark him.
CASSIUS
Casca, be sudden, for we fear prevention.—
Brutus, what shall be done? If this be known,
Cassius or Caesar never shall turn back,
For I will slay myself.
BRUTUS  Cassius, be constant.
Popilius Lena speaks not of our purposes,
For look, he smiles, and Caesar doth not change.
CASSIUS
Trebonius knows his time, for look you, Brutus,
He draws Mark Antony out of the way.
Trebonius and Antony exit.
DECIUS
Where is Metellus Cimber? Let him go
And presently prefer his suit to Caesar.
BRUTUS
He is addressed. Press near and second him.
CINNA
Casca, you are the first that rears your hand.
CAESAR
Are we all ready? What is now amiss
That Caesar and his Senate must redress?
METELLUS, kneeling
Most high, most mighty, and most puissant Caesar,
Metellus Cimber throws before thy seat
An humble heart.
CAESAR  I must prevent thee, Cimber.
These couchings and these lowly courtesies
Might fire the blood of ordinary men
And turn preordinance and first decree
Into the law of children. Be not fond
To think that Caesar bears such rebel blood
That will be thawed from the true quality
With that which melteth fools—I mean sweet
words,
Low-crookèd curtsies, and base spaniel fawning.
Thy brother by decree is banishèd.
If thou dost bend and pray and fawn for him,
I spurn thee like a cur out of my way.
Know: Caesar doth not wrong, nor without cause
Will he be satisfied.
METELLUS
Is there no voice more worthy than my own
To sound more sweetly in great Caesar’s ear
For the repealing of my banished brother?
BRUTUS, kneeling
I kiss thy hand, but not in flattery, Caesar,
Desiring thee that Publius Cimber may
Have an immediate freedom of repeal.
CAESAR
What, Brutus?
CASSIUS, kneeling
Pardon, Caesar; Caesar, pardon!
As low as to thy foot doth Cassius fall
To beg enfranchisement for Publius Cimber.
CAESAR
I could be well moved, if I were as you.
If I could pray to move, prayers would move me.
But I am constant as the Northern Star,
Of whose true fixed and resting quality
There is no fellow in the firmament.
The skies are painted with unnumbered sparks;
They are all fire, and every one doth shine.
But there’s but one in all doth hold his place.
So in the world: ’tis furnished well with men,
And men are flesh and blood, and apprehensive.
Yet in the number I do know but one
That unassailable holds on his rank,
Unshaked of motion; and that I am he
Let me a little show it, even in this:
That I was constant Cimber should be banished
And constant do remain to keep him so.
CINNA, kneeling
O Caesar—
CAESAR  Hence. Wilt thou lift up Olympus?
DECIUS, kneeling
Great Caesar—
CAESAR  Doth not Brutus bootless kneel?
CASCA  Speak, hands, for me!
As Casca strikes, the others rise up and stab Caesar.
CAESAR  Et tu, Brutè?—Then fall, Caesar.
He dies.
CINNA
Liberty! Freedom! Tyranny is dead!
Run hence, proclaim, cry it about the streets.
CASSIUS
Some to the common pulpits and cry out
“Liberty, freedom, and enfranchisement.”
BRUTUS
People and Senators, be not affrighted.
Fly not; stand still. Ambition’s debt is paid.
CASCA
Go to the pulpit, Brutus.
DECIUS  And Cassius too.
BRUTUS  Where’s Publius?
CINNA
Here, quite confounded with this mutiny.
METELLUS
Stand fast together, lest some friend of Caesar’s
Should chance—
BRUTUS
Talk not of standing.—Publius, good cheer.
There is no harm intended to your person,
Nor to no Roman else. So tell them, Publius.
CASSIUS
And leave us, Publius, lest that the people,
Rushing on us, should do your age some mischief.
BRUTUS
Do so, and let no man abide this deed
But we the doers.
All but the Conspirators exit.
 
Enter Trebonius.
 
CASSIUS  Where is Antony?
TREBONIUS  Fled to his house amazed.
Men, wives, and children stare, cry out, and run
As it were doomsday.
BRUTUS  Fates, we will know your
pleasures.
That we shall die we know; ’tis but the time,
And drawing days out, that men stand upon.
CASCA
Why, he that cuts off twenty years of life
Cuts off so many years of fearing death.
BRUTUS
Grant that, and then is death a benefit.
So are we Caesar’s friends, that have abridged
His time of fearing death. Stoop, Romans, stoop,
And let us bathe our hands in Caesar’s blood
Up to the elbows and besmear our swords.
Then walk we forth, even to the marketplace,
And, waving our red weapons o’er our heads,
Let’s all cry “Peace, freedom, and liberty!”
CASSIUS
Stoop then, and wash.
They smear their hands and swords with Caesar’s blood.
How many ages hence
Shall this our lofty scene be acted over
In states unborn and accents yet unknown!
BRUTUS
How many times shall Caesar bleed in sport,
That now on Pompey’s basis lies along
No worthier than the dust!
CASSIUS  So oft as that shall be,
So often shall the knot of us be called
The men that gave their country liberty.
DECIUS
What, shall we forth?
CASSIUS  Ay, every man away.
Brutus shall lead, and we will grace his heels
With the most boldest and best hearts of Rome.
 
Enter a Servant.
 
BRUTUS
Soft, who comes here? A friend of Antony’s.
SERVANT, kneeling
Thus, Brutus, did my master bid me kneel.
Thus did Mark Antony bid me fall down,
And, being prostrate, thus he bade me say:
Brutus is noble, wise, valiant, and honest;
Caesar was mighty, bold, royal, and loving.
Say, I love Brutus, and I honor him;
Say, I feared Caesar, honored him, and loved him.
If Brutus will vouchsafe that Antony
May safely come to him and be resolved
How Caesar hath deserved to lie in death,
Mark Antony shall not love Caesar dead
So well as Brutus living, but will follow
The fortunes and affairs of noble Brutus
Thorough the hazards of this untrod state
With all true faith. So says my master Antony.
BRUTUS
Thy master is a wise and valiant Roman.
I never thought him worse.
Tell him, so please him come unto this place,
He shall be satisfied and, by my honor,
Depart untouched.
SERVANT  I’ll fetch him presently.
Servant exits.
BRUTUS
I know that we shall have him well to friend.
CASSIUS
I wish we may; but yet have I a mind
That fears him much, and my misgiving still
Falls shrewdly to the purpose.
 
Enter Antony.
 
BRUTUS
But here comes Antony.—Welcome, Mark Antony!
ANTONY
O mighty Caesar, dost thou lie so low?
Are all thy conquests, glories, triumphs, spoils
Shrunk to this little measure? Fare thee well.—
I know not, gentlemen, what you intend,
Who else must be let blood, who else is rank.
If I myself, there is no hour so fit
As Caesar’s death’s hour, nor no instrument
Of half that worth as those your swords made rich
With the most noble blood of all this world.
I do beseech you, if you bear me hard,
Now, whilst your purpled hands do reek and smoke,
Fulfill your pleasure. Live a thousand years,
I shall not find myself so apt to die;
No place will please me so, no mean of death,
As here by Caesar, and by you cut off,
The choice and master spirits of this age.
BRUTUS
O Antony, beg not your death of us!
Though now we must appear bloody and cruel,
As by our hands and this our present act
You see we do, yet see you but our hands
And this the bleeding business they have done.
Our hearts you see not; they are pitiful;
And pity to the general wrong of Rome
(As fire drives out fire, so pity pity)
Hath done this deed on Caesar. For your part,
To you our swords have leaden points, Mark Antony.
Our arms in strength of malice, and our hearts
Of brothers’ temper, do receive you in
With all kind love, good thoughts, and reverence.
CASSIUS
Your voice shall be as strong as any man’s
In the disposing of new dignities.
BRUTUS
Only be patient till we have appeased
The multitude, beside themselves with fear;
And then we will deliver you the cause
Why I, that did love Caesar when I struck him,
Have thus proceeded.
ANTONY  I doubt not of your wisdom.
Let each man render me his bloody hand.
First, Marcus Brutus, will I shake with you.—
Next, Caius Cassius, do I take your hand.—
Now, Decius Brutus, yours;—now yours,
Metellus;—
Yours, Cinna;—and, my valiant Casca, yours;—
Though last, not least in love, yours, good
Trebonius.—
Gentlemen all—alas, what shall I say?
My credit now stands on such slippery ground
That one of two bad ways you must conceit me,
Either a coward or a flatterer.—
That I did love thee, Caesar, O, ’tis true!
If then thy spirit look upon us now,
Shall it not grieve thee dearer than thy death
To see thy Antony making his peace,
Shaking the bloody fingers of thy foes—
Most noble!—in the presence of thy corpse?
Had I as many eyes as thou hast wounds,
Weeping as fast as they stream forth thy blood,
It would become me better than to close
In terms of friendship with thine enemies.
Pardon me, Julius! Here wast thou bayed, brave
hart,
Here didst thou fall, and here thy hunters stand
Signed in thy spoil and crimsoned in thy Lethe.
O world, thou wast the forest to this hart,
And this indeed, O world, the heart of thee.
How like a deer strucken by many princes
Dost thou here lie!
CASSIUS
Mark Antony—
ANTONY  Pardon me, Caius Cassius.
The enemies of Caesar shall say this;
Then, in a friend, it is cold modesty.
CASSIUS
I blame you not for praising Caesar so.
But what compact mean you to have with us?
Will you be pricked in number of our friends,
Or shall we on and not depend on you?
ANTONY
Therefore I took your hands, but was indeed
Swayed from the point by looking down on Caesar.
Friends am I with you all and love you all,
Upon this hope, that you shall give me reasons
Why and wherein Caesar was dangerous.
BRUTUS
Or else were this a savage spectacle.
Our reasons are so full of good regard
That were you, Antony, the son of Caesar,
You should be satisfied.
ANTONY  That’s all I seek;
And am, moreover, suitor that I may
Produce his body to the marketplace,
And in the pulpit, as becomes a friend,
Speak in the order of his funeral.
BRUTUS
You shall, Mark Antony.
CASSIUS  Brutus, a word with you.
Aside to Brutus. You know not what you do. Do
not consent
That Antony speak in his funeral.
Know you how much the people may be moved
By that which he will utter?
BRUTUS, aside to Cassius  By your pardon,
I will myself into the pulpit first
And show the reason of our Caesar’s death.
What Antony shall speak I will protest
He speaks by leave and by permission,
And that we are contented Caesar shall
Have all true rites and lawful ceremonies.
It shall advantage more than do us wrong.
CASSIUS, aside to Brutus
I know not what may fall. I like it not.
BRUTUS
Mark Antony, here, take you Caesar’s body.
You shall not in your funeral speech blame us
But speak all good you can devise of Caesar
And say you do ’t by our permission,
Else shall you not have any hand at all
About his funeral. And you shall speak
In the same pulpit whereto I am going,
After my speech is ended.
ANTONY  Be it so.
I do desire no more.
BRUTUS
Prepare the body, then, and follow us.
All but Antony exit.
ANTONY
O pardon me, thou bleeding piece of earth,
That I am meek and gentle with these butchers.
Thou art the ruins of the noblest man
That ever livèd in the tide of times.
Woe to the hand that shed this costly blood!
Over thy wounds now do I prophesy
(Which like dumb mouths do ope their ruby lips
To beg the voice and utterance of my tongue)
A curse shall light upon the limbs of men;
Domestic fury and fierce civil strife
Shall cumber all the parts of Italy;
Blood and destruction shall be so in use
And dreadful objects so familiar
That mothers shall but smile when they behold
Their infants quartered with the hands of war,
All pity choked with custom of fell deeds;
And Caesar’s spirit, ranging for revenge,
With Ate by his side come hot from hell,
Shall in these confines with a monarch’s voice
Cry “Havoc!” and let slip the dogs of war,
That this foul deed shall smell above the earth
With carrion men groaning for burial.
 
Enter Octavius’ Servant.
 
You serve Octavius Caesar, do you not?
SERVANT  I do, Mark Antony.
ANTONY
Caesar did write for him to come to Rome.
SERVANT
He did receive his letters and is coming,
And bid me say to you by word of mouth—
O Caesar!
ANTONY
Thy heart is big. Get thee apart and weep.
Passion, I see, is catching, for mine eyes,
Seeing those beads of sorrow stand in thine,
Began to water. Is thy master coming?
SERVANT
He lies tonight within seven leagues of Rome.
ANTONY
Post back with speed and tell him what hath
chanced.
Here is a mourning Rome, a dangerous Rome,
No Rome of safety for Octavius yet.
Hie hence and tell him so.—Yet stay awhile;
Thou shalt not back till I have borne this corpse
Into the marketplace. There shall I try,
In my oration, how the people take
The cruel issue of these bloody men,
According to the which thou shalt discourse
To young Octavius of the state of things.
Lend me your hand.
They exit with Caesar’s body.
 
Scene 2
Enter Brutus and Cassius with the Plebeians.
 
PLEBEIANS
We will be satisfied! Let us be satisfied!
BRUTUS
Then follow me and give me audience, friends.—
Cassius, go you into the other street
And part the numbers.—
Those that will hear me speak, let ’em stay here;
Those that will follow Cassius, go with him;
And public reasons shall be renderèd
Of Caesar’s death.
FIRST PLEBEIAN  I will hear Brutus speak.
SECOND PLEBEIAN
I will hear Cassius, and compare their reasons
When severally we hear them renderèd.
Cassius exits with some of the Plebeians.
Brutus goes into the pulpit.
THIRD PLEBEIAN
The noble Brutus is ascended. Silence.
BRUTUS  Be patient till the last.
Romans, countrymen, and lovers, hear me for my
cause, and be silent that you may hear. Believe me
for mine honor, and have respect to mine honor
that you may believe. Censure me in your wisdom,
and awake your senses that you may the better
judge. If there be any in this assembly, any dear
friend of Caesar’s, to him I say that Brutus’ love
to Caesar was no less than his. If then that friend
demand why Brutus rose against Caesar, this is my
answer: not that I loved Caesar less, but that I loved
Rome more. Had you rather Caesar were living, and
die all slaves, than that Caesar were dead, to live all
freemen? As Caesar loved me, I weep for him. As he
was fortunate, I rejoice at it. As he was valiant, I
honor him. But, as he was ambitious, I slew him.
There is tears for his love, joy for his fortune, honor
for his valor, and death for his ambition. Who is
here so base that would be a bondman? If any,
speak, for him have I offended. Who is here so rude
that would not be a Roman? If any, speak, for him
have I offended. Who is here so vile that will not
love his country? If any, speak, for him have I
offended. I pause for a reply.
PLEBEIANS  None, Brutus, none.
BRUTUS  Then none have I offended. I have done no
more to Caesar than you shall do to Brutus. The
question of his death is enrolled in the Capitol, his
glory not extenuated wherein he was worthy, nor
his offenses enforced for which he suffered death.
 
Enter Mark Antony and others with Caesar’s body.
 
Here comes his body, mourned by Mark Antony,
who, though he had no hand in his death, shall
receive the benefit of his dying—a place in the
commonwealth—as which of you shall not? With
this I depart: that, as I slew my best lover for the
good of Rome, I have the same dagger for myself
when it shall please my country to need my death.
PLEBEIANS  Live, Brutus, live, live!
FIRST PLEBEIAN
Bring him with triumph home unto his house.
SECOND PLEBEIAN
Give him a statue with his ancestors.
THIRD PLEBEIAN
Let him be Caesar.
FOURTH PLEBEIAN  Caesar’s better parts
Shall be crowned in Brutus.
FIRST PLEBEIAN
We’ll bring him to his house with shouts and
clamors.
BRUTUS
My countrymen—
SECOND PLEBEIAN  Peace, silence! Brutus speaks.
FIRST PLEBEIAN  Peace, ho!
BRUTUS
Good countrymen, let me depart alone,
And, for my sake, stay here with Antony.
Do grace to Caesar’s corpse, and grace his speech
Tending to Caesar’s glories, which Mark Antony
(By our permission) is allowed to make.
I do entreat you, not a man depart,
Save I alone, till Antony have spoke.
He descends and exits.
FIRST PLEBEIAN
Stay, ho, and let us hear Mark Antony!
THIRD PLEBEIAN
Let him go up into the public chair.
PLEBEIANS
We’ll hear him.—Noble Antony, go up.
ANTONY
For Brutus’ sake, I am beholding to you.
He goes into the pulpit.
FOURTH PLEBEIAN  What does he say of Brutus?
THIRD PLEBEIAN  He says for Brutus’ sake
He finds himself beholding to us all.
FOURTH PLEBEIAN
’Twere best he speak no harm of Brutus here.
FIRST PLEBEIAN
This Caesar was a tyrant.
THIRD PLEBEIAN  Nay, that’s certain.
We are blest that Rome is rid of him.
SECOND PLEBEIAN
Peace, let us hear what Antony can say.
ANTONY
You gentle Romans—
PLEBEIANS  Peace, ho! Let us hear him.
ANTONY
Friends, Romans, countrymen, lend me your ears.
I come to bury Caesar, not to praise him.
The evil that men do lives after them;
The good is oft interrèd with their bones.
So let it be with Caesar. The noble Brutus
Hath told you Caesar was ambitious.
If it were so, it was a grievous fault,
And grievously hath Caesar answered it.
Here, under leave of Brutus and the rest
(For Brutus is an honorable man;
So are they all, all honorable men),
Come I to speak in Caesar’s funeral.
He was my friend, faithful and just to me,
But Brutus says he was ambitious,
And Brutus is an honorable man.
He hath brought many captives home to Rome,
Whose ransoms did the general coffers fill.
Did this in Caesar seem ambitious?
When that the poor have cried, Caesar hath wept;
Ambition should be made of sterner stuff.
Yet Brutus says he was ambitious,
And Brutus is an honorable man.
You all did see that on the Lupercal
I thrice presented him a kingly crown,
Which he did thrice refuse. Was this ambition?
Yet Brutus says he was ambitious,
And sure he is an honorable man.
I speak not to disprove what Brutus spoke,
But here I am to speak what I do know.
You all did love him once, not without cause.
What cause withholds you, then, to mourn for
him?—
O judgment, thou art fled to brutish beasts,
And men have lost their reason!—Bear with me;
My heart is in the coffin there with Caesar,
And I must pause till it come back to me.                        	
He weeps.
FIRST PLEBEIAN
Methinks there is much reason in his sayings.
SECOND PLEBEIAN
If thou consider rightly of the matter,
Caesar has had great wrong.
THIRD PLEBEIAN  Has he, masters?
I fear there will a worse come in his place.
FOURTH PLEBEIAN
Marked you his words? He would not take the
crown;
Therefore ’tis certain he was not ambitious.
FIRST PLEBEIAN
If it be found so, some will dear abide it.
SECOND PLEBEIAN
Poor soul, his eyes are red as fire with weeping.
THIRD PLEBEIAN
There’s not a nobler man in Rome than Antony.
FOURTH PLEBEIAN
Now mark him. He begins again to speak.
ANTONY
But yesterday the word of Caesar might
Have stood against the world. Now lies he there,
And none so poor to do him reverence.
O masters, if I were disposed to stir
Your hearts and minds to mutiny and rage,
I should do Brutus wrong and Cassius wrong,
Who, you all know, are honorable men.
I will not do them wrong. I rather choose
To wrong the dead, to wrong myself and you,
Than I will wrong such honorable men.
But here’s a parchment with the seal of Caesar.
I found it in his closet. ’Tis his will.
Let but the commons hear this testament,
Which, pardon me, I do not mean to read,
And they would go and kiss dead Caesar’s wounds
And dip their napkins in his sacred blood—
Yea, beg a hair of him for memory
And, dying, mention it within their wills,
Bequeathing it as a rich legacy
Unto their issue.
FOURTH PLEBEIAN
We’ll hear the will. Read it, Mark Antony.
PLEBEIANS
The will, the will! We will hear Caesar’s will.
ANTONY
Have patience, gentle friends. I must not read it.
It is not meet you know how Caesar loved you.
You are not wood, you are not stones, but men.
And, being men, hearing the will of Caesar,
It will inflame you; it will make you mad.
’Tis good you know not that you are his heirs,
For if you should, O, what would come of it?
FOURTH PLEBEIAN
Read the will! We’ll hear it, Antony.
PLEBEIANS
You shall read us the will, Caesar’s will.
ANTONY
Will you be patient? Will you stay awhile?
I have o’ershot myself to tell you of it.
I fear I wrong the honorable men
Whose daggers have stabbed Caesar. I do fear it.
FOURTH PLEBEIAN  They were traitors. Honorable men?
PLEBEIANS  The will! The testament!
SECOND PLEBEIAN  They were villains, murderers. The
will! Read the will.
ANTONY
You will compel me, then, to read the will?
Then make a ring about the corpse of Caesar,
And let me show you him that made the will.
Shall I descend? And will you give me leave?
PLEBEIANS  Come down.
SECOND PLEBEIAN  Descend.
THIRD PLEBEIAN  You shall have leave.
Antony descends.
FOURTH PLEBEIAN  A ring; stand round.
FIRST PLEBEIAN
Stand from the hearse. Stand from the body.
SECOND PLEBEIAN
Room for Antony, most noble Antony.
ANTONY
Nay, press not so upon me. Stand far off.
PLEBEIANS  Stand back! Room! Bear back!
ANTONY
If you have tears, prepare to shed them now.
You all do know this mantle. I remember
The first time ever Caesar put it on.
’Twas on a summer’s evening in his tent,
That day he overcame the Nervii.
Look, in this place ran Cassius’ dagger through.
See what a rent the envious Casca made.
Through this the well-belovèd Brutus stabbed,
And, as he plucked his cursèd steel away,
Mark how the blood of Caesar followed it,
As rushing out of doors to be resolved
If Brutus so unkindly knocked or no;
For Brutus, as you know, was Caesar’s angel.
Judge, O you gods, how dearly Caesar loved him!
This was the most unkindest cut of all.
For when the noble Caesar saw him stab,
Ingratitude, more strong than traitors’ arms,
Quite vanquished him. Then burst his mighty heart,
And, in his mantle muffling up his face,
Even at the base of Pompey’s statue
(Which all the while ran blood) great Caesar fell.
O, what a fall was there, my countrymen!
Then I and you and all of us fell down,
Whilst bloody treason flourished over us.
O, now you weep, and I perceive you feel
The dint of pity. These are gracious drops.
Kind souls, what, weep you when you but behold
Our Caesar’s vesture wounded? Look you here,
Antony lifts Caesar’s cloak.
Here is himself, marred as you see with traitors.
FIRST PLEBEIAN  O piteous spectacle!
SECOND PLEBEIAN  O noble Caesar!
THIRD PLEBEIAN  O woeful day!
FOURTH PLEBEIAN  O traitors, villains!
FIRST PLEBEIAN  O most bloody sight!
SECOND PLEBEIAN  We will be revenged.
PLEBEIANS  Revenge! About! Seek! Burn! Fire! Kill!
Slay! Let not a traitor live!
ANTONY  Stay, countrymen.
FIRST PLEBEIAN  Peace there! Hear the noble Antony.
SECOND PLEBEIAN  We’ll hear him, we’ll follow him,
we’ll die with him.
ANTONY
Good friends, sweet friends, let me not stir you up
To such a sudden flood of mutiny.
They that have done this deed are honorable.
What private griefs they have, alas, I know not,
That made them do it. They are wise and honorable
And will no doubt with reasons answer you.
I come not, friends, to steal away your hearts.
I am no orator, as Brutus is,
But, as you know me all, a plain blunt man
That love my friend, and that they know full well
That gave me public leave to speak of him.
For I have neither wit, nor words, nor worth,
Action, nor utterance, nor the power of speech
To stir men’s blood. I only speak right on.
I tell you that which you yourselves do know,
Show you sweet Caesar’s wounds, poor poor dumb
mouths,
And bid them speak for me. But were I Brutus,
And Brutus Antony, there were an Antony
Would ruffle up your spirits and put a tongue
In every wound of Caesar that should move
The stones of Rome to rise and mutiny.
PLEBEIANS
We’ll mutiny.
FIRST PLEBEIAN  We’ll burn the house of Brutus.
THIRD PLEBEIAN
Away then. Come, seek the conspirators.
ANTONY
Yet hear me, countrymen; yet hear me speak.
PLEBEIANS
Peace, ho! Hear Antony, most noble Antony!
ANTONY
Why, friends, you go to do you know not what.
Wherein hath Caesar thus deserved your loves?
Alas, you know not. I must tell you then.
You have forgot the will I told you of.
PLEBEIANS
Most true. The will! Let’s stay and hear the will.
ANTONY
Here is the will, and under Caesar’s seal:
To every Roman citizen he gives,
To every several man, seventy-five drachmas.
SECOND PLEBEIAN
Most noble Caesar! We’ll revenge his death.
THIRD PLEBEIAN  O royal Caesar!
ANTONY  Hear me with patience.
PLEBEIANS  Peace, ho!
ANTONY
Moreover, he hath left you all his walks,
His private arbors, and new-planted orchards,
On this side Tiber. He hath left them you,
And to your heirs forever—common pleasures
To walk abroad and recreate yourselves.
Here was a Caesar! When comes such another?
FIRST PLEBEIAN
Never, never!—Come, away, away!
We’ll burn his body in the holy place
And with the brands fire the traitors’ houses.
Take up the body.
SECOND PLEBEIAN  Go fetch fire.
THIRD PLEBEIAN  Pluck down benches.
FOURTH PLEBEIAN  Pluck down forms, windows,
anything.
Plebeians exit with Caesar’s body.
ANTONY
Now let it work. Mischief, thou art afoot;
Take thou what course thou wilt.
 
Enter Servant.
 
How now, fellow?
SERVANT
Sir, Octavius is already come to Rome.
ANTONY  Where is he?
SERVANT
He and Lepidus are at Caesar’s house.
ANTONY
And thither will I straight to visit him.
He comes upon a wish. Fortune is merry
And in this mood will give us anything.
SERVANT
I heard him say Brutus and Cassius
Are rid like madmen through the gates of Rome.
ANTONY
Belike they had some notice of the people
How I had moved them. Bring me to Octavius.
They exit.
 
Scene 3
Enter Cinna the poet and after him the Plebeians.
 
CINNA
I dreamt tonight that I did feast with Caesar,
And things unluckily charge my fantasy.
I have no will to wander forth of doors,
Yet something leads me forth.
FIRST PLEBEIAN  What is your name?
SECOND PLEBEIAN  Whither are you going?
THIRD PLEBEIAN  Where do you dwell?
FOURTH PLEBEIAN  Are you a married man or a
bachelor?
SECOND PLEBEIAN  Answer every man directly.
FIRST PLEBEIAN  Ay, and briefly.
FOURTH PLEBEIAN  Ay, and wisely.
THIRD PLEBEIAN  Ay, and truly, you were best.
CINNA  What is my name? Whither am I going? Where
do I dwell? Am I a married man or a bachelor?
Then to answer every man directly and briefly,
wisely and truly: wisely I say, I am a bachelor.
SECOND PLEBEIAN  That’s as much as to say they are
fools that marry. You’ll bear me a bang for that, I
fear. Proceed directly.
CINNA  Directly, I am going to Caesar’s funeral.
FIRST PLEBEIAN  As a friend or an enemy?
CINNA  As a friend.
SECOND PLEBEIAN  That matter is answered directly.
FOURTH PLEBEIAN  For your dwelling—briefly.
CINNA  Briefly, I dwell by the Capitol.
THIRD PLEBEIAN  Your name, sir, truly.
CINNA  Truly, my name is Cinna.
FIRST PLEBEIAN  Tear him to pieces! He’s a conspirator.
CINNA  I am Cinna the poet, I am Cinna the poet!
FOURTH PLEBEIAN  Tear him for his bad verses, tear him
for his bad verses!
CINNA  I am not Cinna the conspirator.
FOURTH PLEBEIAN  It is no matter. His name’s Cinna.
Pluck but his name out of his heart, and turn him
going.
THIRD PLEBEIAN  Tear him, tear him! Come, brands, ho,
firebrands! To Brutus’, to Cassius’, burn all! Some
to Decius’ house, and some to Casca’s, some to
Ligarius’. Away, go!
All the Plebeians exit, carrying off Cinna.
 
 
 

 
 
ACT 4
 
Scene 1
Enter Antony, Octavius, and Lepidus.
 
ANTONY
These many, then, shall die; their names are
pricked.
OCTAVIUS
Your brother too must die. Consent you, Lepidus?
LEPIDUS
I do consent.
OCTAVIUS  Prick him down, Antony.
LEPIDUS
Upon condition Publius shall not live,
Who is your sister’s son, Mark Antony.
ANTONY
He shall not live; look, with a spot I damn him.
But, Lepidus, go you to Caesar’s house;
Fetch the will hither, and we shall determine
How to cut off some charge in legacies.
LEPIDUS  What, shall I find you here?
OCTAVIUS  Or here, or at the Capitol.                         	
Lepidus exits.
ANTONY
This is a slight, unmeritable man,
Meet to be sent on errands. Is it fit,
The threefold world divided, he should stand
One of the three to share it?
OCTAVIUS  So you thought him
And took his voice who should be pricked to die
In our black sentence and proscription.
ANTONY
Octavius, I have seen more days than you,
And, though we lay these honors on this man
To ease ourselves of diverse sland’rous loads,
He shall but bear them as the ass bears gold,
To groan and sweat under the business,
Either led or driven, as we point the way;
And having brought our treasure where we will,
Then take we down his load and turn him off
(Like to the empty ass) to shake his ears
And graze in commons.
OCTAVIUS  You may do your will,
But he’s a tried and valiant soldier.
ANTONY
So is my horse, Octavius, and for that
I do appoint him store of provender.
It is a creature that I teach to fight,
To wind, to stop, to run directly on,
His corporal motion governed by my spirit;
And, in some taste, is Lepidus but so.
He must be taught and trained and bid go forth—
A barren-spirited fellow, one that feeds
On objects, arts, and imitations
Which, out of use and staled by other men,
Begin his fashion. Do not talk of him
But as a property. And now, Octavius,
Listen great things. Brutus and Cassius
Are levying powers. We must straight make head.
Therefore let our alliance be combined,
Our best friends made, our means stretched;
And let us presently go sit in council
How covert matters may be best disclosed
And open perils surest answerèd.
OCTAVIUS
Let us do so, for we are at the stake
And bayed about with many enemies,
And some that smile have in their hearts, I fear,
Millions of mischiefs.
They exit.
 
Scene 2
Drum. Enter Brutus, Lucilius, Lucius, and the Army.
Titinius and Pindarus meet them.
 
BRUTUS  Stand ho!
LUCILIUS  Give the word, ho, and stand!
BRUTUS
What now, Lucilius, is Cassius near?
LUCILIUS
He is at hand, and Pindarus is come
To do you salutation from his master.
BRUTUS
He greets me well.—Your master, Pindarus,
In his own change or by ill officers,
Hath given me some worthy cause to wish
Things done undone, but if he be at hand
I shall be satisfied.
PINDARUS  I do not doubt
But that my noble master will appear
Such as he is, full of regard and honor.
BRUTUS
He is not doubted.                           	
Brutus and Lucilius walk aside.
A word, Lucilius,
How he received you. Let me be resolved.
LUCILIUS
With courtesy and with respect enough,
But not with such familiar instances
Nor with such free and friendly conference
As he hath used of old.
BRUTUS  Thou hast described
A hot friend cooling. Ever note, Lucilius,
When love begins to sicken and decay
It useth an enforcèd ceremony.
There are no tricks in plain and simple faith;
But hollow men, like horses hot at hand,
Make gallant show and promise of their mettle,
Low march within.
But when they should endure the bloody spur,
They fall their crests and, like deceitful jades,
Sink in the trial. Comes his army on?
LUCILIUS
They mean this night in Sardis to be quartered.
The greater part, the horse in general,
Are come with Cassius.
 
Enter Cassius and his powers.
 
BRUTUS  Hark, he is arrived.
March gently on to meet him.
CASSIUS  Stand ho!
BRUTUS  Stand ho! Speak the word along.
FIRST SOLDIER  Stand!
SECOND SOLDIER  Stand!
THIRD SOLDIER  Stand!
CASSIUS
Most noble brother, you have done me wrong.
BRUTUS
Judge me, you gods! Wrong I mine enemies?
And if not so, how should I wrong a brother?
CASSIUS
Brutus, this sober form of yours hides wrongs,
And when you do them—
BRUTUS  Cassius, be content.
Speak your griefs softly. I do know you well.
Before the eyes of both our armies here
(Which should perceive nothing but love from us),
Let us not wrangle. Bid them move away.
Then in my tent, Cassius, enlarge your griefs,
And I will give you audience.
CASSIUS  Pindarus,
Bid our commanders lead their charges off
A little from this ground.
BRUTUS
Lucius, do you the like, and let no man
Come to our tent till we have done our conference.
Let Lucilius and Titinius guard our door.
All but Brutus and Cassius exit.
 
Scene 3
CASSIUS
That you have wronged me doth appear in this:
You have condemned and noted Lucius Pella
For taking bribes here of the Sardians,
Wherein my letters, praying on his side
Because I knew the man, was slighted off.
BRUTUS
You wronged yourself to write in such a case.
CASSIUS
In such a time as this it is not meet
That every nice offense should bear his comment.
BRUTUS
Let me tell you, Cassius, you yourself
Are much condemned to have an itching palm,
To sell and mart your offices for gold
To undeservers.
CASSIUS  I an itching palm?
You know that you are Brutus that speaks this,
Or, by the gods, this speech were else your last.
BRUTUS
The name of Cassius honors this corruption,
And chastisement doth therefore hide his head.
CASSIUS  Chastisement?
BRUTUS
Remember March; the ides of March remember.
Did not great Julius bleed for justice’ sake?
What villain touched his body that did stab
And not for justice? What, shall one of us
That struck the foremost man of all this world
But for supporting robbers, shall we now
Contaminate our fingers with base bribes
And sell the mighty space of our large honors
For so much trash as may be graspèd thus?
I had rather be a dog and bay the moon
Than such a Roman.
CASSIUS  Brutus, bait not me.
I’ll not endure it. You forget yourself
To hedge me in. I am a soldier, I,
Older in practice, abler than yourself
To make conditions.
BRUTUS  Go to! You are not, Cassius.
CASSIUS  I am.
BRUTUS  I say you are not.
CASSIUS
Urge me no more. I shall forget myself.
Have mind upon your health. Tempt me no farther.
BRUTUS  Away, slight man!
CASSIUS
Is ’t possible?
BRUTUS  Hear me, for I will speak.
Must I give way and room to your rash choler?
Shall I be frighted when a madman stares?
CASSIUS
O you gods, you gods, must I endure all this?
BRUTUS
All this? Ay, more. Fret till your proud heart break.
Go show your slaves how choleric you are
And make your bondmen tremble. Must I budge?
Must I observe you? Must I stand and crouch
Under your testy humor? By the gods,
You shall digest the venom of your spleen
Though it do split you. For, from this day forth,
I’ll use you for my mirth, yea, for my laughter,
When you are waspish.
CASSIUS  Is it come to this?
BRUTUS
You say you are a better soldier.
Let it appear so, make your vaunting true,
And it shall please me well. For mine own part,
I shall be glad to learn of noble men.
CASSIUS
You wrong me every way, you wrong me, Brutus.
I said an elder soldier, not a better.
Did I say “better”?
BRUTUS  If you did, I care not.
CASSIUS
When Caesar lived he durst not thus have moved
me.
BRUTUS
Peace, peace! You durst not so have tempted him.
CASSIUS  I durst not?
BRUTUS  No.
CASSIUS
What? Durst not tempt him?
BRUTUS  For your life you durst
not.
CASSIUS
Do not presume too much upon my love.
I may do that I shall be sorry for.
BRUTUS
You have done that you should be sorry for.
There is no terror, Cassius, in your threats,
For I am armed so strong in honesty
That they pass by me as the idle wind,
Which I respect not. I did send to you
For certain sums of gold, which you denied me,
For I can raise no money by vile means.
By heaven, I had rather coin my heart
And drop my blood for drachmas than to wring
From the hard hands of peasants their vile trash
By any indirection. I did send
To you for gold to pay my legions,
Which you denied me. Was that done like Cassius?
Should I have answered Caius Cassius so?
When Marcus Brutus grows so covetous
To lock such rascal counters from his friends,
Be ready, gods, with all your thunderbolts;
Dash him to pieces!
CASSIUS  I denied you not.
BRUTUS  You did.
CASSIUS
I did not. He was but a fool that brought
My answer back. Brutus hath rived my heart.
A friend should bear his friend’s infirmities,
But Brutus makes mine greater than they are.
BRUTUS
I do not, till you practice them on me.
CASSIUS
You love me not.
BRUTUS  I do not like your faults.
CASSIUS
A friendly eye could never see such faults.
BRUTUS
A flatterer’s would not, though they do appear
As huge as high Olympus.
CASSIUS
Come, Antony, and young Octavius, come!
Revenge yourselves alone on Cassius,
For Cassius is aweary of the world—
Hated by one he loves, braved by his brother,
Checked like a bondman, all his faults observed,
Set in a notebook, learned and conned by rote
To cast into my teeth. O, I could weep
My spirit from mine eyes! There is my dagger,
Offering his dagger to Brutus.
And here my naked breast; within, a heart
Dearer than Pluto’s mine, richer than gold.
If that thou be’st a Roman, take it forth.
I that denied thee gold will give my heart.
Strike as thou didst at Caesar, for I know
When thou didst hate him worst, thou lovedst him
better
Than ever thou lovedst Cassius.
BRUTUS  Sheathe your
dagger.
Be angry when you will, it shall have scope.
Do what you will, dishonor shall be humor.
O Cassius, you are yokèd with a lamb
That carries anger as the flint bears fire,
Who, much enforcèd, shows a hasty spark
And straight is cold again.
CASSIUS  Hath Cassius lived
To be but mirth and laughter to his Brutus
When grief and blood ill-tempered vexeth him?
BRUTUS
When I spoke that, I was ill-tempered too.
CASSIUS
Do you confess so much? Give me your hand.
BRUTUS
And my heart too.                                                  	
They clasp hands.
CASSIUS  O Brutus!
BRUTUS  What’s the matter?
CASSIUS
Have not you love enough to bear with me
When that rash humor which my mother gave me
Makes me forgetful?
BRUTUS  Yes, Cassius, and from
henceforth
When you are over-earnest with your Brutus,
He’ll think your mother chides, and leave you so.
 
Enter a Poet followed by Lucilius, Titinius, and Lucius.
 
POET
Let me go in to see the Generals.
There is some grudge between ’em; ’tis not meet
They be alone.
LUCILIUS  You shall not come to them.
POET  Nothing but death shall stay me.
CASSIUS  How now, what’s the matter?
POET
For shame, you generals, what do you mean?
Love and be friends as two such men should be,
For I have seen more years, I’m sure, than ye.
CASSIUS
Ha, ha, how vilely doth this cynic rhyme!
BRUTUS
Get you hence, sirrah! Saucy fellow, hence!
CASSIUS
Bear with him, Brutus. ’Tis his fashion.
BRUTUS
I’ll know his humor when he knows his time.
What should the wars do with these jigging fools?—
Companion, hence!
CASSIUS  Away, away, be gone!                                        	
Poet exits.
BRUTUS
Lucilius and Titinius, bid the commanders
Prepare to lodge their companies tonight.
CASSIUS
And come yourselves, and bring Messala with you
Immediately to us.                                    	
Lucilius and Titinius exit.
BRUTUS  Lucius, a bowl of wine.                                    	
Lucius exits.
CASSIUS
I did not think you could have been so angry.
BRUTUS
O Cassius, I am sick of many griefs.
CASSIUS
Of your philosophy you make no use
If you give place to accidental evils.
BRUTUS
No man bears sorrow better. Portia is dead.
CASSIUS  Ha? Portia?
BRUTUS  She is dead.
CASSIUS
How ’scaped I killing when I crossed you so?
O insupportable and touching loss!
Upon what sickness?
BRUTUS  Impatient of my absence,
And grief that young Octavius with Mark Antony
Have made themselves so strong—for with her
death
That tidings came—with this she fell distract
And, her attendants absent, swallowed fire.
CASSIUS  And died so?
BRUTUS  Even so.
CASSIUS  O you immortal gods!
 
Enter Lucius with wine and tapers.
 
BRUTUS
Speak no more of her.—Give me a bowl of wine.—
In this I bury all unkindness, Cassius.                              	
He drinks.
CASSIUS
My heart is thirsty for that noble pledge.—
Fill, Lucius, till the wine o’erswell the cup;
I cannot drink too much of Brutus’ love.                         
	He drinks.
Lucius exits.
 
Enter Titinius and Messala.
 
BRUTUS
Come in, Titinius. Welcome, good Messala.
Now sit we close about this taper here,
And call in question our necessities.                                    	
They sit.
CASSIUS
Portia, art thou gone?
BRUTUS  No more, I pray you.—
Messala, I have here receivèd letters
That young Octavius and Mark Antony
Come down upon us with a mighty power,
Bending their expedition toward Philippi.
MESSALA
Myself have letters of the selfsame tenor.
BRUTUS  With what addition?
MESSALA
That by proscription and bills of outlawry,
Octavius, Antony, and Lepidus
Have put to death an hundred senators.
BRUTUS
Therein our letters do not well agree.
Mine speak of seventy senators that died
By their proscriptions, Cicero being one.
CASSIUS
Cicero one?
MESSALA  Cicero is dead,
And by that order of proscription.
Had you your letters from your wife, my lord?
BRUTUS  No, Messala.
MESSALA
Nor nothing in your letters writ of her?
BRUTUSNothing, Messala.
MESSALA  That methinks is strange.
BRUTUS
Why ask you? Hear you aught of her in yours?
MESSALA  No, my lord.
BRUTUS
Now, as you are a Roman, tell me true.
MESSALA
Then like a Roman bear the truth I tell,
For certain she is dead, and by strange manner.
BRUTUS
Why, farewell, Portia. We must die, Messala.
With meditating that she must die once,
I have the patience to endure it now.
MESSALA
Even so great men great losses should endure.
CASSIUS
I have as much of this in art as you,
But yet my nature could not bear it so.
BRUTUS
Well, to our work alive. What do you think
Of marching to Philippi presently?
CASSIUS  I do not think it good.
BRUTUS  Your reason?
CASSIUS  This it is:
’Tis better that the enemy seek us;
So shall he waste his means, weary his soldiers,
Doing himself offense, whilst we, lying still,
Are full of rest, defense, and nimbleness.
BRUTUS
Good reasons must of force give place to better.
The people ’twixt Philippi and this ground
Do stand but in a forced affection,
For they have grudged us contribution.
The enemy, marching along by them,
By them shall make a fuller number up,
Come on refreshed, new-added, and encouraged,
From which advantage shall we cut him off
If at Philippi we do face him there,
These people at our back.
CASSIUS  Hear me, good brother—
BRUTUS
Under your pardon. You must note besides
That we have tried the utmost of our friends,
Our legions are brim full, our cause is ripe.
The enemy increaseth every day;
We, at the height, are ready to decline.
There is a tide in the affairs of men
Which, taken at the flood, leads on to fortune;
Omitted, all the voyage of their life
Is bound in shallows and in miseries.
On such a full sea are we now afloat,
And we must take the current when it serves
Or lose our ventures.
CASSIUS  Then, with your will, go on;
We’ll along ourselves and meet them at Philippi.
BRUTUS
The deep of night is crept upon our talk,
And nature must obey necessity,
Which we will niggard with a little rest.
There is no more to say.
CASSIUS  No more. Good night.
They stand.
Early tomorrow will we rise and hence.
BRUTUS
Lucius.
 
Enter Lucius.
 
My gown.                                                                     	
Lucius exits.
Farewell, good Messala.—
Good night, Titinius.—Noble, noble Cassius,
Good night and good repose.
CASSIUS  O my dear brother,
This was an ill beginning of the night.
Never come such division ’tween our souls!
Let it not, Brutus.
 
Enter Lucius with the gown.
 
BRUTUS  Everything is well.
CASSIUS  Good night, my lord.
BRUTUS  Good night, good brother.
TITINIUS/MESSALA
Good night, Lord Brutus.
BRUTUS  Farewell, everyone.
All but Brutus and Lucius exit.
Give me the gown. Where is thy instrument?
LUCIUS
Here in the tent.
BRUTUS  What, thou speak’st drowsily?
Poor knave, I blame thee not; thou art o’erwatched.
Call Claudius and some other of my men;
I’ll have them sleep on cushions in my tent.
LUCIUS  Varro and Claudius.
 
Enter Varro and Claudius.
 
VARRO  Calls my lord?
BRUTUS
I pray you, sirs, lie in my tent and sleep.
It may be I shall raise you by and by
On business to my brother Cassius.
VARRO
So please you, we will stand and watch your
pleasure.
BRUTUS
I will not have it so. Lie down, good sirs.
It may be I shall otherwise bethink me.
They lie down.
Look, Lucius, here’s the book I sought for so.
I put it in the pocket of my gown.
LUCIUS
I was sure your Lordship did not give it me.
BRUTUS
Bear with me, good boy, I am much forgetful.
Canst thou hold up thy heavy eyes awhile
And touch thy instrument a strain or two?
LUCIUS
Ay, my lord, an ’t please you.
BRUTUS  It does, my boy.
I trouble thee too much, but thou art willing.
LUCIUS  It is my duty, sir.
BRUTUS
I should not urge thy duty past thy might.
I know young bloods look for a time of rest.
LUCIUS  I have slept, my lord, already.
BRUTUS
It was well done, and thou shalt sleep again.
I will not hold thee long. If I do live,
I will be good to thee.
Music and a song. Lucius then falls asleep.
This is a sleepy tune. O murd’rous slumber,
Layest thou thy leaden mace upon my boy,
That plays thee music?—Gentle knave, good night.
I will not do thee so much wrong to wake thee.
If thou dost nod, thou break’st thy instrument.
I’ll take it from thee and, good boy, good night.
He moves the instrument.
Let me see, let me see; is not the leaf turned down
Where I left reading? Here it is, I think.
How ill this taper burns.
 
Enter the Ghost of Caesar.
 
Ha, who comes here?—
I think it is the weakness of mine eyes
That shapes this monstrous apparition.
It comes upon me.—Art thou any thing?
Art thou some god, some angel, or some devil,
That mak’st my blood cold and my hair to stare?
Speak to me what thou art.
GHOST
Thy evil spirit, Brutus.
BRUTUS  Why com’st thou?
GHOST
To tell thee thou shalt see me at Philippi.
BRUTUS  Well, then I shall see thee again?
GHOST  Ay, at Philippi.
BRUTUS
Why, I will see thee at Philippi, then.                            	
Ghost exits.
Now I have taken heart, thou vanishest.
Ill spirit, I would hold more talk with thee.—
Boy, Lucius!—Varro, Claudius, sirs, awake!
Claudius!
LUCIUS  The strings, my lord, are false.
BRUTUS
He thinks he still is at his instrument.
Lucius, awake!
LUCIUS  My lord?
BRUTUS
Didst thou dream, Lucius, that thou so criedst out?
LUCIUS
My lord, I do not know that I did cry.
BRUTUS
Yes, that thou didst. Didst thou see anything?
LUCIUS  Nothing, my lord.
BRUTUS
Sleep again, Lucius.—Sirrah Claudius!
To Varro. Fellow thou, awake!                                     	
They rise up.
VARRO  My lord?
CLAUDIUS  My lord?
BRUTUS
Why did you so cry out, sirs, in your sleep?
BOTH
Did we, my lord?
BRUTUS  Ay. Saw you anything?
VARRO  No, my lord, I saw nothing.
CLAUDIUS  Nor I, my lord.
BRUTUS
Go and commend me to my brother Cassius.
Bid him set on his powers betimes before,
And we will follow.
BOTH  It shall be done, my lord.
They exit.
 
 
 

 
 
ACT 5
 
Scene 1
Enter Octavius, Antony, and their army.
 
OCTAVIUS
Now, Antony, our hopes are answerèd.
You said the enemy would not come down
But keep the hills and upper regions.
It proves not so; their battles are at hand.
They mean to warn us at Philippi here,
Answering before we do demand of them.
ANTONY
Tut, I am in their bosoms, and I know
Wherefore they do it. They could be content
To visit other places, and come down
With fearful bravery, thinking by this face
To fasten in our thoughts that they have courage.
But ’tis not so.
 
Enter a Messenger.
 
MESSENGER  Prepare you, generals.
The enemy comes on in gallant show.
Their bloody sign of battle is hung out,
And something to be done immediately.
ANTONY
Octavius, lead your battle softly on
Upon the left hand of the even field.
OCTAVIUS
Upon the right hand, I; keep thou the left.
ANTONY
Why do you cross me in this exigent?
OCTAVIUS
I do not cross you, but I will do so.                                        	
March.
 
Drum. Enter Brutus, Cassius, and their army including
Lucilius, Titinius, and Messala.
 
BRUTUS  They stand and would have parley.
CASSIUS
Stand fast, Titinius. We must out and talk.
OCTAVIUS
Mark Antony, shall we give sign of battle?
ANTONY
No, Caesar, we will answer on their charge.
Make forth. The Generals would have some words.
OCTAVIUS, to his Officers  Stir not until the signal.
The Generals step forward.
BRUTUS
Words before blows; is it so, countrymen?
OCTAVIUS
Not that we love words better, as you do.
BRUTUS
Good words are better than bad strokes, Octavius.
ANTONY
In your bad strokes, Brutus, you give good words.
Witness the hole you made in Caesar’s heart,
Crying “Long live, hail, Caesar!”
CASSIUS  Antony,
The posture of your blows are yet unknown,
But, for your words, they rob the Hybla bees
And leave them honeyless.
ANTONY  Not stingless too.
BRUTUS  O yes, and soundless too,
For you have stolen their buzzing, Antony,
And very wisely threat before you sting.
ANTONY
Villains, you did not so when your vile daggers
Hacked one another in the sides of Caesar.
You showed your teeth like apes and fawned like
hounds
And bowed like bondmen, kissing Caesar’s feet,
Whilst damnèd Casca, like a cur, behind
Struck Caesar on the neck. O you flatterers!
CASSIUS
Flatterers?—Now, Brutus, thank yourself!
This tongue had not offended so today
If Cassius might have ruled.
OCTAVIUS
Come, come, the cause. If arguing make us sweat,
The proof of it will turn to redder drops.
Look, I draw a sword against conspirators;
He draws.
When think you that the sword goes up again?
Never, till Caesar’s three and thirty wounds
Be well avenged, or till another Caesar
Have added slaughter to the sword of traitors.
BRUTUS
Caesar, thou canst not die by traitors’ hands
Unless thou bring’st them with thee.
OCTAVIUS  So I hope.
I was not born to die on Brutus’ sword.
BRUTUS
O, if thou wert the noblest of thy strain,
Young man, thou couldst not die more honorable.
CASSIUS
A peevish schoolboy, worthless of such honor,
Joined with a masker and a reveler!
ANTONY
Old Cassius still.
OCTAVIUS  Come, Antony, away!—
Defiance, traitors, hurl we in your teeth.
If you dare fight today, come to the field;
If not, when you have stomachs.
Octavius, Antony, and their army exit.
CASSIUS
Why now, blow wind, swell billow, and swim bark!
The storm is up, and all is on the hazard.
BRUTUS
Ho, Lucilius, hark, a word with you.
Lucilius and Messala stand forth.
LUCILIUS  My lord?
Brutus and Lucilius step aside together.
CASSIUS
Messala.
MESSALA  What says my general?
CASSIUS  Messala,
This is my birthday, as this very day
Was Cassius born. Give me thy hand, Messala.
Be thou my witness that against my will
(As Pompey was) am I compelled to set
Upon one battle all our liberties.
You know that I held Epicurus strong
And his opinion. Now I change my mind
And partly credit things that do presage.
Coming from Sardis, on our former ensign
Two mighty eagles fell, and there they perched,
Gorging and feeding from our soldiers’ hands,
Who to Philippi here consorted us.
This morning are they fled away and gone,
And in their steads do ravens, crows, and kites
Fly o’er our heads and downward look on us
As we were sickly prey. Their shadows seem
A canopy most fatal, under which
Our army lies, ready to give up the ghost.
MESSALA
Believe not so.
CASSIUS  I but believe it partly,
For I am fresh of spirit and resolved
To meet all perils very constantly.
BRUTUS
Even so, Lucilius.                                    	
Brutus returns to Cassius.
CASSIUS  Now, most noble Brutus,
The gods today stand friendly that we may,
Lovers in peace, lead on our days to age.
But since the affairs of men rests still incertain,
Let’s reason with the worst that may befall.
If we do lose this battle, then is this
The very last time we shall speak together.
What are you then determinèd to do?
BRUTUS
Even by the rule of that philosophy
By which I did blame Cato for the death
Which he did give himself (I know not how,
But I do find it cowardly and vile,
For fear of what might fall, so to prevent
The time of life), arming myself with patience
To stay the providence of some high powers
That govern us below.
CASSIUS  Then, if we lose this battle,
You are contented to be led in triumph
Thorough the streets of Rome?
BRUTUS
No, Cassius, no. Think not, thou noble Roman,
That ever Brutus will go bound to Rome.
He bears too great a mind. But this same day
Must end that work the ides of March begun.
And whether we shall meet again, I know not.
Therefore our everlasting farewell take.
Forever and forever farewell, Cassius.
If we do meet again, why we shall smile;
If not, why then this parting was well made.
CASSIUS
Forever and forever farewell, Brutus.
If we do meet again, we’ll smile indeed;
If not, ’tis true this parting was well made.
BRUTUS
Why then, lead on.—O, that a man might know
The end of this day’s business ere it come!
But it sufficeth that the day will end,
And then the end is known.—Come ho, away!
They exit.
 
Scene 2
Alarum. Enter Brutus and Messala.
 
BRUTUS
Ride, ride, Messala, ride, and give these bills
Unto the legions on the other side!
He hands Messala papers.
Loud alarum.
Let them set on at once, for I perceive
But cold demeanor in Octavius’ wing,
And sudden push gives them the overthrow.
Ride, ride, Messala! Let them all come down.
They exit.
 
Scene 3
Alarums. Enter Cassius carrying a standard and
Titinius.
 
CASSIUS
O, look, Titinius, look, the villains fly!
Myself have to mine own turned enemy.
This ensign here of mine was turning back;
I slew the coward and did take it from him.
TITINIUS
O Cassius, Brutus gave the word too early,
Who, having some advantage on Octavius,
Took it too eagerly. His soldiers fell to spoil,
Whilst we by Antony are all enclosed.
 
Enter Pindarus.
 
PINDARUS
Fly further off, my lord, fly further off!
Mark Antony is in your tents, my lord.
Fly therefore, noble Cassius, fly far off.
CASSIUS
This hill is far enough.—Look, look, Titinius,
Are those my tents where I perceive the fire?
TITINIUS
They are, my lord.
CASSIUS  Titinius, if thou lovest me,
Mount thou my horse and hide thy spurs in him
Till he have brought thee up to yonder troops
And here again, that I may rest assured
Whether yond troops are friend or enemy.
TITINIUS
I will be here again even with a thought.                            	
He exits.
CASSIUS
Go, Pindarus, get higher on that hill.
My sight was ever thick. Regard Titinius
And tell me what thou not’st about the field.
Pindarus goes up.
This day I breathèd first. Time is come round,
And where I did begin, there shall I end;
My life is run his compass.—Sirrah, what news?
PINDARUS, above.  O my lord!
CASSIUS  What news?
PINDARUS
Titinius is enclosèd round about
With horsemen that make to him on the spur,
Yet he spurs on. Now they are almost on him.
Now Titinius! Now some light. O, he lights too.
He’s ta’en.                                                                                 	
Shout.
And hark, they shout for joy.
CASSIUS  Come down, behold no more.—
O, coward that I am to live so long
To see my best friend ta’en before my face!
Pindarus comes down.
Come hither, sirrah.
In Parthia did I take thee prisoner,
And then I swore thee, saving of thy life,
That whatsoever I did bid thee do
Thou shouldst attempt it. Come now, keep thine
oath.
Now be a freeman, and with this good sword,
That ran through Caesar’s bowels, search this
bosom.
Stand not to answer. Here, take thou the hilts,
And, when my face is covered, as ’tis now,
Guide thou the sword.                                        	
Pindarus stabs him.
Caesar, thou art revenged
Even with the sword that killed thee.                                   	
He dies.
PINDARUS
So I am free, yet would not so have been,
Durst I have done my will.—O Cassius!—
Far from this country Pindarus shall run,
Where never Roman shall take note of him.
He exits.
 
Enter Titinius and Messala.
 
MESSALA
It is but change, Titinius, for Octavius
Is overthrown by noble Brutus’ power,
As Cassius’ legions are by Antony.
TITINIUS
These tidings will well comfort Cassius.
MESSALA
Where did you leave him?
TITINIUS  All disconsolate,
With Pindarus his bondman, on this hill.
MESSALA
Is not that he that lies upon the ground?
TITINIUS
He lies not like the living. O my heart!
MESSALA
Is not that he?
TITINIUS  No, this was he, Messala,
But Cassius is no more. O setting sun,
As in thy red rays thou dost sink to night,
So in his red blood Cassius’ day is set.
The sun of Rome is set. Our day is gone;
Clouds, dews, and dangers come. Our deeds are
done.
Mistrust of my success hath done this deed.
MESSALA
Mistrust of good success hath done this deed.
O hateful error, melancholy’s child,
Why dost thou show to the apt thoughts of men
The things that are not? O error, soon conceived,
Thou never com’st unto a happy birth
But kill’st the mother that engendered thee!
TITINIUS
What, Pindarus! Where art thou, Pindarus?
MESSALA
Seek him, Titinius, whilst I go to meet
The noble Brutus, thrusting this report
Into his ears. I may say “thrusting it,”
For piercing steel and darts envenomèd
Shall be as welcome to the ears of Brutus
As tidings of this sight.
TITINIUS  Hie you, Messala,
And I will seek for Pindarus the while.
Messala exits.
Why didst thou send me forth, brave Cassius?
Did I not meet thy friends, and did not they
Put on my brows this wreath of victory
And bid me give it thee? Didst thou not hear their
shouts?
Alas, thou hast misconstrued everything.
But hold thee, take this garland on thy brow.
Laying the garland on Cassius’ brow.
Thy Brutus bid me give it thee, and I
Will do his bidding.—Brutus, come apace,
And see how I regarded Caius Cassius.—
By your leave, gods, this is a Roman’s part.
Come, Cassius’ sword, and find Titinius’ heart!
He dies on Cassius’ sword.
 
Alarum. Enter Brutus, Messala, young Cato, Strato,
Volumnius, and Lucilius, Labeo, and Flavius.
 
BRUTUS
Where, where, Messala, doth his body lie?
MESSALA
Lo, yonder, and Titinius mourning it.
BRUTUS
Titinius’ face is upward.
CATO  He is slain.
BRUTUS
O Julius Caesar, thou art mighty yet;
Thy spirit walks abroad and turns our swords
In our own proper entrails.                                          	
Low alarums.
CATO  Brave Titinius!—
Look whe’er he have not crowned dead Cassius.
BRUTUS
Are yet two Romans living such as these?—
The last of all the Romans, fare thee well.
It is impossible that ever Rome
Should breed thy fellow.—Friends, I owe more
tears
To this dead man than you shall see me pay.—
I shall find time, Cassius; I shall find time.—
Come, therefore, and to Thasos send his body.
His funerals shall not be in our camp,
Lest it discomfort us.—Lucilius, come.—
And come, young Cato. Let us to the field.—
Labeo and Flavius, set our battles on.
’Tis three o’clock, and, Romans, yet ere night
We shall try fortune in a second fight.
They exit.
 
Scene 4
Alarum. Enter Brutus, Messala, Cato, Lucilius, and
Flavius.
 
BRUTUS
Yet, countrymen, O, yet hold up your heads!
Brutus, Messala, and Flavius exit.
CATO
What bastard doth not? Who will go with me?
I will proclaim my name about the field.
I am the son of Marcus Cato, ho!
A foe to tyrants and my country’s friend.
I am the son of Marcus Cato, ho!
 
Enter Soldiers and fight.
 
LUCILIUS
And I am Brutus, Marcus Brutus, I!
Brutus, my country’s friend! Know me for Brutus.
Cato is killed.
O young and noble Cato, art thou down?
Why, now thou diest as bravely as Titinius
And mayst be honored, being Cato’s son.
FIRST SOLDIER, seizing Lucilius
Yield, or thou diest.
LUCILIUS  Only I yield to die.
There is so much that thou wilt kill me straight.
Offering money.
Kill Brutus and be honored in his death.
FIRST SOLDIER
We must not. A noble prisoner!
 
Enter Antony.
 
SECOND SOLDIER
Room, ho! Tell Antony Brutus is ta’en.
FIRST SOLDIER
I’ll tell the news. Here comes the General.—
Brutus is ta’en, Brutus is ta’en, my lord.
ANTONY  Where is he?
LUCILIUS
Safe, Antony, Brutus is safe enough.
I dare assure thee that no enemy
Shall ever take alive the noble Brutus.
The gods defend him from so great a shame!
When you do find him, or alive or dead,
He will be found like Brutus, like himself.
ANTONY
This is not Brutus, friend, but I assure you,
A prize no less in worth. Keep this man safe.
Give him all kindness. I had rather have
Such men my friends than enemies. Go on,
And see whe’er Brutus be alive or dead,
And bring us word unto Octavius’ tent
How everything is chanced.
They exit in different directions.
 
Scene 5
Enter Brutus, Dardanus, Clitus, Strato, and Volumnius.
 
BRUTUS
Come, poor remains of friends, rest on this rock.
He sits down.
CLITUS
Statilius showed the torchlight, but, my lord,
He came not back. He is or ta’en or slain.
BRUTUS
Sit thee down, Clitus. Slaying is the word;
It is a deed in fashion. Hark thee, Clitus.
He whispers to Clitus.
CLITUS
What, I, my lord? No, not for all the world.
BRUTUS
Peace, then, no words.
CLITUS  I’ll rather kill myself.
BRUTUS
Hark thee, Dardanus.                               	
He whispers to Dardanus.
DARDANUS  Shall I do such a deed?
CLITUS  O Dardanus!
DARDANUS  O Clitus!
Dardanus and Clitus step aside.
CLITUS
What ill request did Brutus make to thee?
DARDANUS
To kill him, Clitus. Look, he meditates.
CLITUS
Now is that noble vessel full of grief,
That it runs over even at his eyes.
BRUTUS
Come hither, good Volumnius. List a word.
VOLUMNIUS
What says my lord?
BRUTUS  Why this, Volumnius:
The ghost of Caesar hath appeared to me
Two several times by night—at Sardis once
And this last night here in Philippi fields.
I know my hour is come.
VOLUMNIUS  Not so, my lord.
BRUTUS
Nay, I am sure it is, Volumnius.
Thou seest the world, Volumnius, how it goes.
Our enemies have beat us to the pit.                           	
Low alarums.
It is more worthy to leap in ourselves
Than tarry till they push us. Good Volumnius,
Thou know’st that we two went to school together;
Even for that our love of old, I prithee,
Hold thou my sword hilts whilst I run on it.
VOLUMNIUS
That’s not an office for a friend, my lord.
Alarum continues.
CLITUS
Fly, fly, my lord! There is no tarrying here.
BRUTUS
Farewell to you—and you—and you, Volumnius.—
Strato, thou hast been all this while asleep.
Farewell to thee, too, Strato.—Countrymen,
My heart doth joy that yet in all my life
I found no man but he was true to me.
I shall have glory by this losing day
More than Octavius and Mark Antony
By this vile conquest shall attain unto.
So fare you well at once, for Brutus’ tongue
Hath almost ended his life’s history.
Night hangs upon mine eyes; my bones would rest,
That have but labored to attain this hour.
Alarum. Cry within “Fly, fly, fly!”
CLITUS
Fly, my lord, fly!
BRUTUS  Hence. I will follow.
All exit but Brutus and Strato.
I prithee, Strato, stay thou by thy lord.
Thou art a fellow of a good respect;
Thy life hath had some smatch of honor in it.
Hold, then, my sword, and turn away thy face
While I do run upon it. Wilt thou, Strato?
STRATO
Give me your hand first. Fare you well, my lord.
BRUTUS
Farewell, good Strato.
Brutus runs on his sword.
Caesar, now be still.
I killed not thee with half so good a will.                            
He dies.
 
Alarum. Retreat. Enter Antony, Octavius, Messala,
Lucilius, and the army.
 
OCTAVIUS  What man is that?
MESSALA
My master’s man.—Strato, where is thy master?
STRATO
Free from the bondage you are in, Messala.
The conquerors can but make a fire of him,
For Brutus only overcame himself,
And no man else hath honor by his death.
LUCILIUS
So Brutus should be found.—I thank thee, Brutus,
That thou hast proved Lucilius’ saying true.
OCTAVIUS
All that served Brutus, I will entertain them.—
Fellow, wilt thou bestow thy time with me?
STRATO
Ay, if Messala will prefer me to you.
OCTAVIUS
Do so, good Messala.
MESSALA  How died my master, Strato?
STRATO
I held the sword, and he did run on it.
MESSALA
Octavius, then take him to follow thee,
That did the latest service to my master.
ANTONY
This was the noblest Roman of them all.
All the conspirators save only he
Did that they did in envy of great Caesar.
He only in a general honest thought
And common good to all made one of them.
His life was gentle and the elements
So mixed in him that nature might stand up
And say to all the world “This was a man.”
OCTAVIUS
According to his virtue, let us use him
With all respect and rites of burial.
Within my tent his bones tonight shall lie,
Most like a soldier, ordered honorably.
So call the field to rest, and let’s away
To part the glories of this happy day.
They all exit.
 

